Written evidence submitted by Keith Borer Consultants (FSS007)FAO Science and Technology CommitteeI was forwarded details 
by the Forensic Science Society 
of the consultation 
into the closure of the Forensic Science Service 
by the Select Committee on Science and Technology, but thought it appropriate to respond directly.
I am a Director of
 a consultancy 
which 
provides 
forensic science services to the legal profession throughout the UK, Republic of Ireland and overseas
, and to some p
olice forces/prosecuting authorities within the UK
.  Within the jurisdiction of England and Wales
,
 part of our 
service
 is “defence examinations” 
of prosecution 
forensic 
evidence in 
criminal
 cases
.  Currently we conduct this exercise in 
around 
2000 criminal cases per year
,
 largely on instructions from solicitors and barristers.  I believe 
we 
perhaps 
have 
a 
unique perspective derived from 
a 
prominent
 
role in the 
scrutiny and evaluation of the provision of forensic science to police forces 
in 
the prosecution of criminal matters.
As regards the questions raised in the consultation 
document, 
I would respond as follows:
Q1.              Does the Government have an effective strategy for forensic science in the UK and is it sufficient to support forensic science R &amp; D and criminal justice?A.              
In my view the current provision of forensic science service
s
 to police forces and the prosecution component of the Criminal Justice System does not represent effective implementation of a coherent strategy.  Irrespective of whether the government’s strategy for forensic science
,
 either in research 
and 
development or criminal justice
,
 would be effective if properly applied
,
 
our experience 
suggests there is either an ineffective strategy or ineffective 
implementation.
 Q2.              Did the FSS transition and closure run smoothly and within budget?A.              
I do not have direct knowledge of whether the FSS closure 
and 
case 
transition 
was within budget
, but it is our
 experienc
e that it did not run smoothly in
 all cases.  
A
pplication
s to the FSS 
Archive for
 copies or delivery of FSS case file
s
, 
were met 
promptly in 
only 
a small proportion of cases
. T
he process was more often slow and 
sometimes 
incomplete.  
There was also inconsistency in the way disclosure was provided.  
It was of particular concern to us that
,
 while the archive could 
usually 
provide the case file (or a copy thereof)
,
 they 
often 
seemed unable to recover 
other 
retained material
. 
 
Irrespective of whether the closure of the FSS was considered a
 success, the integrity of the a
rchive files and materials continues to cause concern.
 
Q3.              What impacts have the FSS’s closure had on (i) the criminal justice system and (ii) forensic science R &amp; D and training? In particular, have the appropriate quality standards and accreditation been rigorously maintained?  Q4.              What should be the role of the Forensic Science Regulator?Q5.              What is the size of the forensic market and how stable is it?A.               
This is not a question I can address given that the size of the forensic market is largely dictated by the procurement process between police forces and the forensic providers tendering for those contracts.
  Our particular exper
ience is in the scrutiny of the end product.
 
  
It is evident however, that as Police forces seek to reduce the spend on forensic services, there is an increase in forensic examinations 
conducted 
on behalf of defendants (or on Court instructions) largely funded by Legal Aid.
Q6.              How are forensic science services procured by police forces and could procurement processes be improved?Q7.              Has the closure of the FSS resulted in a loss of intellectual wealth through its scientists leaving the forensic science profession, or the UK? (please provide evidence/examples).Q8.              Are current arrangements for the FSS’s archives satisfactory?  How could arrangements for the retention of case files and forensic materials in the UK be improved?General CommentThe nature of our work and the number of cases in which we sc
rutinise the forensic provision
 of all the major forensic providers to police forces in the UK, means we have a close working relationship with the professional staff of those providers (many of whom 
previously 
work
ed
 for the Forensic Science Service) and a clear understanding of the pressures that have been applied to forensic provision over the last few years.  As a barometer of attitudes
,
 there is clear indication that the overall quality of forensic science provision has not improved in the perception of forensic science professionals, notwithstanding that budgets may have been reduced and 
some 
testing may have 
become 
more focused.  It is our direct experience that forensic science strategies applied to cases (which drive the forensic provision) are not always 
effective 
and often result in wasted resources.  
We 
also 
observe many cases in which important forms of forensic examination and analysis have been omitted
 when they should not have been
.  While the relationship that now exists between police forces and forensic science providers 
may be more focused
 on the requirements of police forces, it 
appears to us 
that the needs of the criminal justice system have not been given appropriate consideration.  We would be happy to provide further information 
or casework examples 
if the Science and Technology Committee considers it appropriate.
January 2013
&#xa0;
