Written evidence submitted by Mrs Beryl Burton (FSS008)&#xa0;
1) I am a member of
 
the public.
 
My knowledge of
 
Forensic Science provision is derived from what
 
I have heard and read.
&#xa0;
2) I am concerned that Forensic Science is now wholly in the private sector.
 
This means that
 
companies will have to make a profit otherwise they will close down.
 
Due to being in a market
 
environment,
 
decisions on tests required may be curtailed due to cost rather than whether or not a
 
further test would provide more accuracy. In an interview on B.B.C. Radio 4, a member of
 
the
 
Forensic Science Service gave an example of her advice being over-ruled by a member of the
 
police. She felt that the police were taking cost into account.
 
Of
 
course, the police could say that the
 
Forensic Science Service wanted to do another test to make more money,
 
an uncomfortable and
 
unsatisfactory position for both.
&#xa0;
I am uneasy about the police being both test result provider and prosecuto
r. I
 would be happier if
 
independent providers were doing the testing.
&#xa0;
3) If companies fail in the private sector,
 
how will provision of forensic science services continue?
 
Will they have to be done in other countries which could result in a lack of transparency and control
 
over standards.
&#xa0;
4) I understand that very few police forces are accredited at present.
 
This situation must be rectified
 
as soon as possible and their standards monitored.
 
The police are losing ground in the public's
 
estimation and miscarriages of
 
justice will exacerbate that situation.
&#xa0;
5) The Forensic Science Service,
 
supported by the Govern
ment,
 has gone. I
t may well have been top
 
heavy and needed some streamlining and changes of
 
practice such as working hours.
 
However, it
 
was full of knowledge,
 
experience and expertise,
 
and provided a safe,
 
stable,
 
impartial and secure base
 
for the provision of material to put before the courts.
&#xa0;
6) The U.K. sees itself as a leading developed country and I see justice for the people as important
 
as 
education and a Health Service. I
 am not convinced that either the police or the private sector will
 
be able to provide it.
&#xa0;
January 2013
