Written evidence submitted by  J W F Harriman (FSS011)IntroductionI have been an independent firearms forensic examiner since about 1985. I am a sole trader with my own practice. During an average year I will give expert advice in some 30 – 40 cases, mainly for the Defence.
Experience and qualificationsAnswers to the Committee’s questionsAs a firearms forensic examiner I have confined my answers to that particular specialist field.
1. Does the Government have an effective strategy for forensic science in the UK and is it sufficient to support forensic science R&amp;D and criminal justice?In my opinion, there is no integrated government strategy for forensic science in the UK. Certainly, there has been no government involvement of which I am aware in the field of firearms examination. Accordingly, there is no R&amp;D programme and no real support for the criminal justice system.
2. Did the FSS transition and closure run smoothly and within budget?I am unable to comment on this.
3. What impacts have the FSS’s closure had on (i) the criminal justice system and (ii) forensic science R&amp;D and training? In particular, have the appropriate quality standards and accreditation been rigorously maintained? (please provide evidence/examples)In my experi
e
nce the closure of the FSS has caused a dramatic increase in the use of police support staff as expert witnesses
 in firearms cases
. The
y
 tend to be force armourers or firearms licensing enquiry officers. They are used because of the cost implications associated with instructing a commercial 
forensic 
provider
 coupled with lead times for submission of reports
.
Their training is minimal and most are required to prepare evidence-ready reports after attending a 2 day basic course from a commercial 
training 
provider. 
In my experi
e
nce their ability varies considerably from those who are not competent to undertake firearms 
examinations
 to those who can 
be relied upon to deal with basic classification issues.
 I am aware of several cases where police support personnel have been allowed to give evidence when they were clearly 
non 
peritus
. 
This is especially the case when the issue before the court is whether a firearm is an antique for the purposes of the exemption at Section 58(2) of the Firearms Act 1968.
The courts appear to be uncritical of 
non-
peritus
 police support staff who appear as experts. If any doubt as to any expert’s credibility exists, then the judge should direct that a 
voir
 dire
 hearing is held to test that expert’s credibility.
The use of police personnel invariably raises questions of their impartiality. In my 
experience
, most 
police employees feel that they need to sustain their employers’ objectives. Equally most are unlikely to be robust if subjected to 
pressure
 by senior officers. The virtue of the FSS was its separation from the police service.
As a general principle, I suggest that it is not in the interests of justice for the police service to have its own forensic arm. 
There should always be clear blue water between forensic scientists and law enforcement officers.
Since the closure of the Council for the 
Registration
 of Forensic 
Practitioners
 
(March 2009) 
there has been no accreditation for forensic firearms examiners. This is a disturbing 
situation as several offences within the Firearms Acts carry mandatory custodial sentences on conviction, unless the judge find
s
 there are exceptional circumstances. When a Defendant’s liberty is a stake 
and 
then 
subject to
 a mandatory 
gaol 
sentence, it follows that the Crown’s expert adviser must be a properly accredited person
.
There
 is a need for some form of accreditation 
system
 for 
the
 following aspects of firearms examination.
4. What should be role of the Forensic Science Regulator?The role of the Regulator is adequately defined as it is now. The Regulator’s website has some useful material for experts as downloads.
5. What is the size of the forensics market and how stable is it?I can only advise on the area of firearms examination. As gun crime is rare in the UK, the size of the market is 
small
. However, it is stable because criminals always seem able to obtain firearms even though 
many
 classes of guns have 
been
 prohibited 
from
 private 
ownership
.
There are a small 
number
 of larger 
commercial
 forensic providers e.g. LGC Forensics, Key Forensic or 
Manlove
.
 They tend to deal with most police and Prosecution work.
There are about six active independent providers – sole traders and one consultancy group who by default deal with Defence work.
6. &#xa0;How are forensic science services procured by police forces and could procurement processes be improved?Basic firearms forensic work is often given to police support staff e.g. armourers or 
licensing
 g personnel. This is unsatisfactory as few are properly qualified.
More serious work 
tends
 to be given to the larger commercial. If contracts are awarded on a value for money basis after a “beauty parade” of potential providers then it is hard to see how this might be improved.
Police forces could obtain good quality initial forensic advice by going to a local independent provider at rates less than the commercial firms and with quicker lead and turnaround times
.
 
7. Has the closure of the FSS resulted in a loss of intellectual wealth through its scientists leaving the forensic science profession, or the UK? (please provide evidence/examples)In my opinion, the scientists in the FSS Northern Firearms Unit and the London laboratory were a world class pool of 
expertise in firearms forensic matters. The dispersal of this pool is a disgrace. The UK has lost a valuable and irreplaceable asset as a result.
Some former FSS personnel have retired and other have found new roles within 
NaBIS
 and Met Police Firearms Unit. A small number have limited work from the larger commercial providers and one has set up as an independent examiner. Presumably the rest have either left forensic science or moved to another discipline within it.
The FSS firearms examination community was competent, professional and composed of agreeable people with whom it was a pleasure to work. I counted many friends amongst it and mourn its passing.
8. Are current arrangements for the FSS’s archives satisfactory? How could arrangements for the retention of case files and forensic materials in the UK be improved?I have little 
experience
 of this aspect of the FSS’s closure. However, on the one occasion when I needed to review an FSS file, it was made available to me by the Met Police Firearms Unit in a speedy and efficient 
manner
.
Other MattersAs a Defence examiner, I often experi
e
nce considerable difficulty in obtaining access to firearms held as evidence.
 Often a court order has to be obtained to permit me to have access. 
My examination is often conducted in a police 
property
 store or interview room under less than ideal conditions and always under time 
pressures
. It is almost impossible to have evidence left with me although I have the means to secure it and 
the
 necessary authority to 
possess
 it legally.
There is no equality of arms between 
Prosecution and Defence in terms of costs. The CPS will accept any commercial charges from its preferred provider. The Defence is always at the disadvantage in that where legal aid, is concerned prior authority must be sought. If granted there is a schedule of maximum charges which are always lower than those of the commercial providers used by the Crown. 
January 2013
&#xa0;
&#xa0;
