Written evidence submitted by Forensic Science Society (FSS015)1. Does the Government have an effective strategy for forensic science in the UK and is it sufficient to support forensic science R&amp;D and criminal justice?In the opinion of many of our members it does not.  The current thinking, hardly strategy, appears to be based entirely around cost saving. Given the speed of the decision to close the FSS and the lack of consultation it is hard to imagine that there is any long term strategy. It cannot seriously have been a strategic move to make Britain the only Country in the western world with no state funded forensic provision, to lag behind the rest of Europe in the use of new multiplexes for 
DNA
 analysis, and to have its reputation and standing among the international scientific community lowered. 
With regard to R&amp;D again there appears to be no strategy for this.  The largest provider has a small department devoted to R&amp;D in 
DNA
 but this consists of two people.   There is no provision for research in any other area and no funding by any of the providers.  There has been no move to provide additional funding to replace that invested by 
FSS
. The Special Interest Group is a positive move.  However there needs to be strategic oversight to ensure that major technological changes are not missed, for example. There should be a level of structural funding to complement funding by the research councils and forensic science providers, to cover areas such as development of high quality data sets to support interpretation. 
2. Did 
the FSS transition and closure run smoothly and within budget?We cannot comment on this.
3
. What impacts have the FSS’s closure had on (i) the criminal justice system and (ii) forensic science R&amp;D and training? In particular, have the appropriate quality standards and accreditation been rigorously maintained? 
The potential for evidence to be missed is 
enormous. Although the government target was for a 20% reduction in expenditure to police budgets in fact the cuts to forensic science were more like 40%.   This has meant that the police forces want the cheapest provision available.  In many forces we understand that police are now carrying out their own examinations and often by staff with limited experience.  In addition streamed line forensic reporting could lead to insufficient attention being given to exhibits at the early stages of an examination so that evidence is not recovered.   Fragmentation of case work is another area which will impinge on the CJS.  Cases are started in one laboratory where evidence is recovered at a very basic level and where too little time is allocated and then shipped out to whoever can provide the analysis for the lowest cost and in the fastest time.  The decision for the examination rests largely with the police who may not be in the best position to make that decision. This means that there is no scientist with overall responsibility for the decisions and interpretation of the evidence.  This could have a drastic impact on the larger more serious cases where there is real need for many scientists to work together at all levels of the scientific investigation.  Fragmentation will reduce the range of services that smaller companies will be able to offer.                                                                                          
With regard to R&amp;D the closure of the 
FSS
 has probably had less impact than it might have had several years ago.  However some universities have little collaboration with the police and providers.  Research carried out in isolation with no link to the needs of the courts and police is potentially a waste of resources. The Forensic Science Society has been running conferences that bring these three establishments together with a view to directing research to where it is most needed.  Commercialisation has meant that companies are reluctant to share their ideas and thus in some areas work is being duplicated.  
With regard to training the closure is unlikely to make much difference to the large companies as most training is in house. However, where smaller companies are employing relatively inexperienced staff who work by following a strict procedure any in house training will be severely limited. It has also made a difference is that in some instances we believe that experienced scientists are being retrained to carry out tests to a less stringent standard.  
&#xa0;
4. 
What should be role of the Forensic Science Regulator?The task for the Regulator, to monitors standards, is enormous. It has been effective in so far as it has tried to ensure that the provision of scientific services is to a recognised standard, set by the United Kingdom Accreditation Service (UKAS). This is useful but is limited in several respects.
 i) The UKAS system looks in detail at procedures and at whether or not the operators work according to laid down method. It leaves the assessment of individual’s competence to the organisations although provision for this assessment is a UKAS requirement. UKAS does spot check individuals but on a very ad hoc basis.                                                                                                 
  ii) The methods used and assessed need not be the same for any two organisations.   
iii)  All the visits to organisations are pre-arranged. This gives them time to put on a good show.  
iv) .Accreditation by UKAS is expensive. Smaller companies cannot afford it and police offering ‘in house ‘services are slow to adopt it. 
The Regulator’ role does not deal adequately with individual competency.   Recent failures have been dealt with on the basis that they were process driven as opposed to individual failings.  The Forensic Science Society is an independent professional body that has been setting standards for several years – both in relation to individual competence and university teaching.  There is a need for the Regulator to work more closely with the professional body in ensuring that there is independence in the individual‘s assessment process. He should also consult more widely with experienced practitioners on the potential risks posed by the current approach taken by police and commercial suppliers to case work examinations.                               
&#xa0;5. 
What is the size of the forensics market and how stable is it?The market is likely to reduce further for two reasons.  Firstly because the police have reduced the amount they are prepared to spend on forensic science, preferring to bring it in house in the belief that this would be as good but cheaper.  Secondly because of streamlined case reporting, where potential guilty pleas are not fully investigated scientifically.   
Work is being farmed out to various companies with varying degrees of accreditation and competence.  
As all forensic science providers are private companies unlike the 
FSS
, and there is always a possibility they could pull out of the business if it proves unprofitable. If any one company did this it would have large repercussions on the remaining firms and could drive up prices and increase 
turnaround
 times, not to mention loss of material and continuity. 
&#xa0;
6. &#xa0;How are forensic science services procured by police forces and could procurement processes be improved?We cannot comment on this.
7. 
Has the closure of the FSS resulted in a loss of intellectual wealth through its scientists leaving the forensic science profession or the UK? Yes, a huge loss has resulted.  Many of the staff have left the forensic arena completely by taking early retirement or redundancy.  A number have gone in to academia where their experience is valuable
.
 Some have combined with colleagues to provide specialist services and others have moved to their local police laboratories.   These cause most concern.  Because of the fragmentation of case work those with vast expertise and knowledge are being reduced to robotic technicians who are not allowed to apply any thought processes.
As a consequence morale among experienced scientists is very low.  This will eventually and inevitably lead to mistakes.
8.  Are current arrangements for the FSS’s archives satisfactory? How could arrangements for the retention of case files and forensic materials in the UK be improved?   The current arrangement for archived material is scheduled to last for three years.  After that there no knowing what will happen.  Scientists have complained that access to files for cold cases is difficult and only part files are being allowed out. Recovery of anything from the Archive takes many weeks and there are now no staff there who know what they are looking for when trawling through freezers or other archived materials, often resulting in the wrong retained materials being sent. 
The loss of the databases for manufacturers and staff is also a potentially serious issue as well as the non retention of B scrapes for 
DNA
. 
Material collections and the literature database are currently held by the Home Office but not accessed.  
These should be made available 
for consultation by the profession
 and the Forensic Science Society has offered to assist here. 
   
January 2013
&#xa0;
&#xa0;
