&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultDr Kevin Maddersdefault (ESA021)defaultProfile and declaration of interestdefault1. I am a space policy consultant and visiting professor of Space Policy and Law at KU Leuven and of Information Society Law at King’s College London. I have been involved in space affairs for over 25 years, including several as an ESA official. I have acted as expert to the European Commission and ESA on space policy formation and co-organized the European Space Policy Workshops at KU Leuven which preceded and then reviewed the European Space Policy that was adopted in 2007. I served on the BNSC European Affairs Advisory Board, on which I was among those calling for a UK space agency. I am the author of 
defaultA New Force at a New Frontier
default, which sought to unravel what had been termed the European space sector’s “intimidating complexity”. The book, which includes major UK space developments, also explored governance issues, an inquiry developed in later debate (see References). Finally, I am an evaluator for EU Framework Programme Space Calls.
default2. 
defaultMy aim with this evidence is to address what seem to me the main governance issues raised by the inquiry, not to provide an individual position on each question.
default3. 
defaultI declare that I both advise and contract with governmental and private entities, in particular through Systemics Network International, of which I am managing partner. This evidence is, however, submitted in a personal capacity. I am subject to some confidentiality constraints
default.
defaultThe return of serious UK commitment to space and its implicationsdefault4
default. The Committee’s inquiry is very timely. Its primary focus is of course on UK interests. And those interests have witnessed a transformation over the past decade, culminating in 
defaultboosts to UK funding in ESA in 2008 and
default 2012, the creation of the UK Space Agency, and formation of a strategic industrial and research cluster for space around Harw
defaultell –
default the site since 2009 of an applications-oriente
defaultd ESA Establishment. 
defaultBritain is taking its place again at the top table in European space
default and
default is set to become one of the top three investors in ESA over the timeframe 2013-2018. A well-targeted contribution under ELIPS will furthermore see genuine UK participation in the International Space Station programme. These developments of course complement major existing strengths in space applications and science, while the British flair for innovation is 
defaultexemplified
default by the Reaction Engines’ Skylon project.
default5
default. 
defaultI join many from the space community in welcoming this transformation, and 
defaultI will not dwell o
defaultn the period that preceded it
default. This has been covered in my own work and in others’.  The focus wit
defaulth space is now
default on innovation for growth within a wider S&amp;T policy aimed at revamping the UK economic model. This clearly accords with UK long-term interests and rightly attracts good cross-party support. But the change in policy cannot wipe away overnight the legacy of the partial UK disengagement from space over previous decades: The UK Space Agency remains fairly small, its proportion of funding going to ESA is high in relation to the national programme, and, within ESA funding, it is striking that the UK, unlike France, Germany or Italy, is not
default prominent in
default itself thrusting one or more major 
defaultR&amp;D mission 
defaultprogrammes forward.
default6
default. The point here is that the UK has still much to do if it wants to complete its transformation in space
default and thereby reap the full rewards this expanding sector offers
default. 
defaultThe UK 
defaultParliament will have a key role in this respect, not only in supporting the UK Space Agency as it develops and 
defaultin 
defaultconducting much-needed 
defaultpro-competitive 
defaultreform of the Outer Space Act, but in encouraging programmes and commercial initia
defaulttives that can place 
defaultEurope
default and the UK at
default the vanguard of space development. 
defaultSkylon may come into question here, as may entirely new prospects such as asteroid mining, so far only being targeted only by American companies. But, whatever the UK itself does, it is plain that its capacity to go it alone in space will 
defaultalways 
defaultremain limited. It is also difficult to conceive that the
default UK, whatever the outcome of a
default referendum on EU membership, will have much reason to change horses from the European space structures it has become so deeply embedded in since the early 1960s.
default7
default. Against this background, it becomes vital for the UK to consolidate its own position in space within a favourab
defaultle European environment
default. And this environment, as the Committee has realized in opening its inquiry, is changing fundamentally due to the rising importance of the EU in the space field
default,
default even before the change made by the Lisbon Treaty that explicitly gave the EU space policy 
defaultand programmatic competence and
default freedom to establish “appropriate relations” with ESA.
default8
default. The consequences for e
defaultach country of this 
defaultchange in the European space landscape are profound. But my above remarks already indicate that the UK’s profile in ESA is not currently one that need bind
default its hands – a different situation than that of 
defaulta country
default like Germany, which has a 
defaultgreater vested interest in the ESA status quo. 
defaultI shall return to the opportunity this flexibility offers towards the end of this evidence.
default9
default. 
defaultI believe it unlikely the UK will leave the EU,
default but 
defaultone must still allow for this possibility and I do so
default in the following remarks
default. If it were to happen, the effects of withdrawal within the EU would probably be mainly budgetary for space, but not structural. The UK would be placed in a similar position to either Norway or Switzerland. Accommodations will be required for those countries under any governance reform, as the European Commission recognizes in its Communication COM 2012 671 (hereafter the “2012 Communication”).
defaultThe paradigm shift in EU-ESA relationsdefault10
default. While the UK in 2013 contributes less than 10% to ESA’s coffers, income from the EU is over 21%. If it were an ESA Member State, the EU would therefore already be ESA’s third largest contributor. But the EU is of course not a Member State, and is not allowed to be under the ESA Convention. The “third party” funding it passes through ESA is, moreover, different in kind (mainly procurement for utilization purposes rather than for major R&amp;D). And the EU spends further sums on European space research and applications that do not pass through ESA. It is true that these sums are currently relatively low but are set to increase under the Multiannual Financial Framework 2014-2020. The total the EU currently plans for space under the MFF is some €11.5 billion. When ESA was founded, it was zero. Space was also practically nowhere on the Commission’s radar. Today, it is an integral part of numerous EU policies and has made it into both the EU’s charter and European Council business.
defaultThe current EU-ESA relationship and the impact of the Lisbon Treatiesdefault11
default. This game-changing development was foreseeable from the time of the 1986 Single European Act (SEA), which endorsed a European Community R&amp;D competence, and 
defaultfrom
default moves that culminated in the 1992 Maastricht Treaty. The first Communication by the European Commission on space indeed did not take long to follow (1988) and made claims whose chief political tenets of legitimacy, democratic accountability etc., one finds repeated in the 2012 Communication. A European Space Policy for the EU, ESA and their combined Member States was then arrived at, fitfully, in 2007
default. This
default underpinned a common and evolving architecture, which was then in turn endorsed in the Lisbon Treaty but le
defaultft unsolved 
defaultkey issues of institutional convergence already plain to several commentators from the SEA onwards. Supported by an inter-institutional framework agreement only from 2004, 
defaultdialogue and cooperation between the EU and ESA nevertheless slowly but surely
default grew
default across the entire period.
default12
default. In retrospect, a number of things stand out from this thumbnail history. First, it was ESA Member States which showed the greatest caution towards the kind “rapprochement” the 2012 Communication advocates. I have witnessed this first-hand over the entire period in question and it is pertinent here to mention that, based on our work in ESA, my colleague Walter Thiebaut and I suggested, in an article entitled “Two Europes in One Space”
default,
default an agreement between ESA and the European Community to facilitate institutional
default convergence. This seemed 
defaulta 
defaultself-evident need, and certain to
default take time and care to work 
defaultout. But in the event it took 
defaulttwelve years
default to arrive at the 2004 framework agreement; it took less than 
defaultten
default to place men on the Moon. Meanwhile, the ESA Executive has taken some courageous positions on the relations that should prevail between the EU and ESA. In its long-term perspective document
default aimed at
default ministers, 
defaultAgenda 2011
default, the ESA Director General grasped the nettle and proposed “to make ESA become an Agency of the EU”. His current 
defaultAgenda 2015
default recal
defaultls this proposal but notes 
default“this perspective was challenged by Member States”.
default13
default. I draw the Committee’s attention to this, because it is often thought that the EU is involved in some kind of hostile take-over of ESA. This is plainly not the case. While serving its Member States, each institution is ultimately the steward of the general European interest. And the ESA Executive is i
defaultn a position to understand 
defaultin terms of programmes and their 
defaultmanagement 
defaultthe drag on Europe’s potential that results from unnecessary an
defaultd
default protracted
default institutional bifurcation, whereas the signs
default 
defaultpointing to ESA
default one day becoming an EU agency 
defaultare
default unmistakeable. As a good manager, ESA therefore wants to clarify this issue to be able to get on with its real work of delivering its part of a world-class European space programme in concert with national
default and EU
default programmes. And here it is important to note that this, apparently, is the driving motive behind the 
defaultPolitical Declaration
default endorsed by the ESA ministerial Council in November 2012 in its Resolution No. 4, to which I w
defaultould recommend the Committee 
defaultgive
defaults
default its attention
default alongside the 2012 Communication
default.
defaultThe Member State perspective and defaultthe defaultreform planning horizondefault14
default. 
defaultIt is also worth noting that Member States’
default perspective
defaults were for historical reasons 
defaultformed in ESA in a manner entirely divorced
default 
defaultfrom the EU
default system
default. What emerged was a kind of “bottom-up” cooperative and in large part optional participative system
default,
default whose 
defaultbaseline
default common element is today ESA’s Science and Basic Technology programmes. Such a system relies either on coalescence around further common
defaultly held programme
default objectives, 
defaultfor 
defaultwhich
default there is not always scope, 
defaultor on one or more Member States providing the financial and pol
defaultitical impetus for programmes
default, alone or 
defaulton the basis of
default cross-programme understandings. It is an attractive system, supported by an efficient organization in ESA and accompanied by the industrial return system, on which I am sure the Committee will be extensively briefed. In short, the system has both advantages and defects, the worst of which is that a period of disagreement over aligning interests and programme objectives can cause the system to unravel. Gaps in programmes are furthermore inevitable in such a system, which can undermine the coherence of the entire programme structure. Operational 
defaultutilization 
defaultactivities have, in addition, generally been less well catered for and are indeed subject to major constraints under the ESA Convention. And it must not be forgotten that ESA is limited 
defaultonly
default to space, whereas the uses to which space tools can be put are far wider
default, especially today
default. Unsurprisingly, this is where Member States tend to be most united in encouraging a strong EU role in support of utilization based on the panoply of EU policies.
default15
default. But any move away from an ESA system that in practice has industrial return at its heart can strike at both national objectives and industrial capacity cultivated in some cases over decades. It is for this reason that strong caution among many Member States is not only understandable but indicated. Despite some of the language in the 2012 Communication
default,
default the Commission is perfectly aware
default of this but, equally, 
defaultmake
defaults
default the point that some solution must be found. It then uses the traditional Commission approach, well tried in reforming other sectors in which Member States have major strategic interests such as telecommunications, of initiating a process with a clear and realistic planning timeframe for undertaking the necessary adjustments. Here
default,
default the target timeframe for change is 2020 to 2025, since most of the major programmatic orientations have been set to 2020. The maximum “negotiation” period prior to fundamental governance change being initiated is hence 2014 to 2018, as clarity will already be needed before the next major planning cycle.
defaultSome suggestions for a way forwarddefault16
default. T
defaulthe maximum period
default for negotiation just estimated is
default based not on positions taken by the Commission and in ESA but on the difficulty of the issues that must be resolved. I know that there are hopes to resolve them already in 2014 and would indeed regard this as ideal. Delay is also not in the UK interest, since it is rebuilding its space profile and will need a stable governance environment in which to make its policy choices. But uncertainty abounds in reshaping such a complex and strategic part of the European architecture
default. I
defaultt is hence best, I would suggest, to plan for this and to ensure a 
defaultprocess
default is in place that is robust 
defaultenough to handle the various issues
default on a rolling basis.
default17
default.  By its nature, such a process has to depart from a business as usual approach, with the different “space Europes” each busy
default principally
default with defining 
defaulttheir own
default positions. If one accepts the simple premise that some form of accommodation is required under an overall EU policy umbrella (which is difficult to deny in light of the Lisbon Treaty), then
default it should follow
default that the process should be an inclusive one under the general orchestration of the EU. 
defaultHowever, I would emphasize that –
default being an inherently intergovernmental question affecting an independent intergovernmental organization and a set of Member States that will probably come to include all EU
default ones but also some non-EU ones –
default it would seem appropriate that the Presidency of the European Union should take the lead role. I believe this would also set the minds of several Member States at rest.
default18
default. I would also stress that any change of space governance in Europe will affect many interests. Already some of the changes that have occurred, namely in relation to delegation of responsibilities by the EU to ESA for Galileo and GMES, have produced cause for concern. All institutional actors
default,
default but also stakeholders in the sector (and not only the major industry and operators lobbies)
default,
default should be able to contribute, as should representatives of the general public including of course parliamentarians. If this additional premise is
default also
default accepted, this would
default then
default imply convening some sort of conference.
default19
default. I believe such a conference is already long over-due. A similar mechanism was
default, I would add,
default instrumental in resolving major space policy issues in the 1960s and early 1970s and gave 
defaultbirth to today’s ESA.
default20
default. If the
default suggestion
default for a conference approach
default is pursued, then I would also recommend that 
defaultit
default address as priority overall political goals (the 2007 European Space Policy is out of date) and an overall programme plan (a goal sadly not followed through sufficiently from 2007). It is necessary to proceed from these to the desired governance architecture, which will not be as simple as a clean 
defaultseparation of policy elaboration in the EU and programme implementation in an EU ESA
default,
default even if this may be the main governance model many will 
defaultnaturally 
defaultwish to explore.
default21.
default I would also suggest that, in the interests of ef
defaultficacy, the essential political thrust 
defaultbe maintained throughout
default such a conference’s life
default. With the multiplicity of the legal issues 
defaultone can think of, it would be wise to give tho
defaultse prominence only once 
defaultagreement has been reached on 
defaultthe main 
defaultprinciples.
default Thus, I would 
defaultfurther
default suggest that the conference’s terms of reference 
defaultbe
default widely drafted 
defaultso as 
defaultto allow resort to the full extent of options available under the Lisbon Treaty
default. These
default might include resort to the enhanced cooperation fall-back which is there provided for. Such a mechanism, combined with amendments to ESA’s Convention and appropriate agreements
default, may
default prove apt in particular to accommodate Member States
default’ vital concerns and maintain
default programme involvement by non-EU ESA Member States and of Canada under its Cooperation Agreement.
defaultConclusion: A smart governance architecture for Europe and the UKdefault22
default. My advice to the Committee in the changing environment relevant to space governance is twofold: 1) not 
defaultto foreclose the option of ESA (
defaultand thus with the bul
defaultk of UK civil space investment)
default entering under the EU umbrella and 2) to assess
default, not in “one go” but stepwise
default over the coming approximately one year
default,
default how best to calibrate both funding and non-funding policy tools so that the UK has the chance of benefitting from the full potential space has to offer. In both regards, it might be that, for the type of programme the UK has currently prioritized, features of the EU system might in the end be the more rational option. This will not be true of all ESA Member States.
defaultReferencesdefaultMadders, K.J., 
defaultA New Force at a New Frontier: Europe’s development in the space field in the light of its main actors, policies, law and activities from its beginnings up to the present
default, Cambridge University Press, 625 pp.
defaultMadders, K.J., and Thiebaut, W.M., “Carpe diem: Europe must make a genuine space policy now”, 
defaultSpace Policy
default, Vol. 23 (2007) 7–12.
defaultMadders, K.J., and Thiebaut, W.M., “Two Europes in one Space: The Evolution of Relations between the European Space Agency and the European Community in Space Affairs”, 
defaultJournal of Space Law
default, Vol. 20 (1992) 117-132.
defaultWouters, J., and Madders, K.J., “Taking Stock of Europe’s developing spa
defaultce policy: from the European space policy workshops to the European space policy forum”, 
defaultSpace Policy
default, Vol. 20  2004, 31-36.
default&#xa0;
defaultApril 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default