Written evidence from the defaultAssociation of Directors of Adult Social Services and the Local Government Associationdefault (LTC 26)default&#xa0;defaultBackground default&#xa0;defaultADASSdefault&#xa0;defaultThe
default defaultAssociation of Directors of Adult Social Services (ADASS) represents Directors of Adult Social Services in Local Authorities in England. As well as having statutory responsibilities for the commissioning and provision of social care, ADASS members often also share a number of responsibilities for the commissioning and provision of housing, leisure, library, culture, arts, community services and increasingly, Children’s Social Care within their Councils.
defaultLGAdefaultThe Local Government Association (LGA) is the national voice of local government.
default 
defaultWe work with and on behalf of our membership to promote support and improve local government. The 422 authorities that make up the LGA cover every part
default of England and Wales. Together, 
defaultthey represent over 50 million people.
default 
defaultThey include county councils, metropolitan district councils, English unitary authorities, London boroughs, shire district councils and Welsh unitary authorities, along with fire authorities, police authorities, national park authorities and passenger transport authorities.
default 
defaultResponses:defaultThe scope for varying the current mix of service responsibilities so that more people are treated outside hospital and the consequences of such service re-design for costs and effectivenessdefaultThere are 
defaultstrong and 
defaultwidely acknowledged arguments for dis
defaultinvest
defaulting
default from acute
default services
default and reinvest
defaulting into community settings. H
defaultowever
default,
default a number of barriers restrict these opportunities
default. T
defaulthe
default financial models of Payment by Results and the tar
defaultiff
default 
defaults
defaultystem, which reward
default acute activity
default, actually incentivise hospital trusts to maximise service take-up.
default 
defaultMore fundamentally, it is beginning to be accepted that there are too many hospitals now, particularly those based on the traditional District General Hospital model, given the developments in primary, community and social care.
default 
defaultThe challenges to resolving this are considerable; simply downsizing a hospital’s activity in order to reduce acute funding is rarely an option, as issues of clinical safety and the required staffing levels for accreditat
defaultion of services rapidly emerge
default. The real alternatives of reconfiguration and changing the roles of local groups of hospitals have always proved immensely difficult to engineer against public resistance.
default 
defaultThese barriers are further hei
defaultghtened by significant budget pr
defaultessures within the whole system, limiting the opportuni
defaultty to switch funding 
defaultor develop community based facilities in advance of reducing acute demand.
defaultOne way forward would be to create a tariff system for acute care which included the full end-to-end care pathway, pre-admission and post discharge, in order to incentivise a more holistic approach to clinical commissioning and service development.
defaultSupporting this,
default reforms of health and social care are pushing for greater integration, placing a stronger emphasis on prevention and early intervention and promoting a system-wide focus on improved outcomes for the individual set with an individual and local 
defaultcommunity asset based approach
default.
default 
defaultThe emphasis over the past period has been on speedier discharge, but as set out above th
defaultis needs to shift to prevent un
defaultnecessary admissions, sign posting people to other services, plus providing a range of “off the shelf” services which would poten
defaulttially support people to avoid unnecessary admissions
default to in-patient care i.e.
default 24/7 access to 
defaultt
defaultele
defaulthealthcare
default, homecare, 
defaultrespite 
defaultetc.
default without requiring in depth and bureaucratic assessments.
default 
defaultThe Community Budget areas have shown us that this will require a joined up approach to leadership and shared cultures across the health and care system as well as sharing of individual data records so that people can be tracked and supported across the system. 
defaultIn addition to improved tariff and incentive mechanisms, local areas will need to take a joint approach to the use of resources and develop joine
defaultd up commissioning arrangements
default and to make sure that resources are shifted from acute to preventative and community based services. Health and Wellbeing Boards
default (HWBs)
default, as the body with statutory responsibility to promote integration, will be crucial in holding the system together locally, promoting joined up working and enabling the best use of resources locally.
defaultThe LGA strongly supports this issue being addressed. It also features strongly in emerging Health and Wellbeing Boards’ priorities. We recognise too the political impact for council
defaultlors, MPs, Scrutiny and 
defaultHealthw
defaultatch
default partners.
defaultThe readiness of local NHS and social care services to treat patients with long-term conditions (including multiple conditions) within the communitydefaultSocial c
defaultare and the NHS have been working closely over a long period of ti
defaultme and there
default are 
defaultmany examples of integrated commu
defaultnity based services and support
default. 
defaultThese models and variations can readily be ada
defaultpted to suit the management of long term c
defaultonditions. 
defaultThe current reform
defaults 
defaultare helping to accelerate the pace and scale 
defaultof these approaches with the Health and Wellbeing Boards being a new element in
default bringing local partners
default together to address local need. T
defaulthe shift
default of Public Health responsibilities
default to councils alongside the development of an integrated Outcomes Framework are catalysts to making community based integrated approaches the norm
default.
default 
defaultADASS
default and the LGA are
default 
defaultcurrently working closely with five
default other national partners (NH
defaultS England / DH /PHE / Monitor
default/ ADCS) through an Integrated Care Working Group (ICWG) to support the acceleration of the pace and scale of integrated community based preventative and early intervention services and support. This work is reporting directly to the Care Ser
defaultvices Minister
default and the
default partnership is considered a significant step
default.
defaultEqually, the development of Personal Health Budgets for all those with Continuing Healthcare funding provides an opportunity for personal budgets to be developed jointly with social care, pooling resources based on an individual need, which potentially could
default lead to the development of more
default clinical support, which may be more appropriate, deliver better outcomes and at reduced cost – arguably this is already happening in many areas. The real benefits will come by extending this approach beyond CHC e.g. mental health needs and support provi
defaultded by local community groups or 
defaultthird sector
default organisations
default rather than medically led psychiatric services.
default 
defaultOne of th
defaulte key messages for the NHS and social c
defaultare working together to support
default 
defaultthose with long-term conditions
default is that integrated services must be designed from the bottom up, des
defaultigned around integrated health and
default social care personal support plans and the pathways of people through a local health and social care system.
defaultIt is not sufficient to develop joint services based purely upon organisational, managerial or structural integration.
default 
defaultThere needs to be a holistic and whole-system approach.
defaultSuccessful and sustainable re-design requires the full engagement of front-line staff, managers, people who use services and their 
defaultcarers
default.
default 
defaultThere also has to be
default cultural change across organisations, facilitating multi-disciplinary
default working.
defaultThe practical assistance offered to commissioners to support the design of services which promote community-based care and provide for the integration of health and social care in the management of long-term conditionsdefaultThe ICWG is set
defaultting a "Common Purpose Framework
default" (CPF) to describe the barriers to integration and establish national and local enablers to overcome these barriers. This will in
defaultclude commissioning guidance.
default 
defaultADASS
default is working with the Kings Fund to produce gu
defaultidance for H
defaultealth and 
defaultW
defaultellbeing 
defaultB
defaultoard
defaults
default in integrating commissioning activity
default.
default 
defaultADASS is 
defaultalso 
defaultsupporting and promoting a leadership 
defaultprogramme to help Directors in their role in
default taking forward integration of commissioning and service provision.
default 
defaultArguably much of the work already being p
defaultrogressed with Personalisation and 
defaultT
defaulthink 
defaultL
defaultocal 
defaultA
defaultct 
defaultP
defaultersonal(TLAP)
default promotes an approach which moves away the “professional gift” model – diagnosis and labels, to service u
defaultsers determining their needs and
default priorities, based on th
defaulte outcomes they want to achieve
default and arrangin
defaultg the support that they require
default and how it is 
defaultprovi
defaultded.
defaultThere
default are many 
defaultmajor national, regional or local third sector organisations 
defaultworking with people with long term conditions and they
default will no doubt make their own submissions.
default 
defaultParticularly at national level, they can be a valuable source of research into service integration, improved outcomes and examples of best practice from across the country.
defaultThe numbers of people dying in hospital has continued to rise whilst a number of surveys indicate that, given a choice, a large majority of people would choose to be cared for at home. Recent research by the Nuffield Trust reaffirmed the inter-relation of health and
default social care at the end of life
default and the need to provide a holistic approach focused around the individual and their needs and wishes. Social services have access to and make best use of local intelligence (health and social care data sets) to focus on the design and delivery of end of life care improvements in all sectors.
default 
defaultEngagement with the emerging clinical consortia, comm
defaultissioning support organisations
default and health providers across acute and primary care settings, local hospices and local authorities is well developed to ensure the effective pooling of resources to facilitate the commissio
defaultning and design of new services
default with a clear understanding of the shared service improvement agenda.
defaultFinally, however, as noted above, the real-life experience of staff, patients and carers is 
defaultan essential element of service re-designs
default and commissioners must access this experience as much as possible.
defaultThe ability of NHS and social care providers to treat multi-morbidities and the patient as a person rather than focusing on individual conditionsdefaultADASS
default and the LGA
default 
defaulthave
default the longest history o
defaultf promoting person
defaultalisation within the public sec
defaulttor, which consid
defaulters "outcomes" over treatment, conditions and models of service
default.
default 
defaultThis is reflected in the three outco
defaultmes for the NHS, Public Health and
default Adult Social Care, which can guide providers.
default 
defaultPersonalisation i
defaults being complemented by outcome-
defaultbased commissioning and more recently by the development of payment by results. These are driving
default a person centred approach.
defaultBoth the LGA and ADASS have supported National Voices and ‘Think Local Act Per
defaultsonal’ in the development of a n
defaultarrative for integrated care an support, driven by patients and service users, that will help commissioners and providers to understand and respond to the needs of real people.
defaultThe ability to treat patients as people first is critically dependent upon the quality, skills and stability of the health and social care workforce.
default 
defaultIn respect of supporting peopl
defaulte with long term conditions
default in the community, there is a great deal of guidance available for staff involved in personal care of any kind.
default 
defaultOne example would be the ‘Common Care Principles for Self-Care’ developed by Skills for Health and Skills for Care, supported by ADASS through the Workforce Development Network.
default 
defaultAlongside the Workforce Dev
defaultelopment S
defaulttrategies of the Department of Health and Skills for Care, ADASS has prompted the development of integrated workforce strategies at a local level (initially known as Integrated Local Area Workforce Strategies).
default 
defaultMinimisation of staff turnover, as one example of a benefit, promotes continuity of carers on teams of carers for people, which in turn promotes greater dignity in the care arrangements.
defaultTaking a truly person centred approach to LTCs means c
defaulthanging the paradigm, so that people who use services are
default given more control of co-ordination and 
defaultare expected and helped to take
default more
default responsibility for
default 
defaultself-management
default. Coordinate My Care for end of life care seems a good example and has led to real shifts in practice and better outcomes. Alongside this, there are some real opportunities to use technology to help manage LTCs more effectively. This includes some of the “diagnostics” in telehealth but also some simple ways of being able to communicate regularly an
defaultd frequently with people who use services
default. The infrastructure of telecare has a lot to offer here. 
defaultT
defaulthe concept of “pathways” can be as much of a hindrance
default as a 
defaulthelp.
default B
defaulty definition many
default people who use
default of 
defaultadult social care
default have several conditions, so then flooding them with specialists each with their 
defaultown pathway to follow just makes life more complicated.
default 
defaultADASS
default and the LGA
default would suggest that
default, we keep the core benefit of a “pathway” which is consistent and evidence based 
defaultdecision making but have health and 
defaultsupport plans much more based on the person. 
defaultFinally it
default is important to 
defaultrecognize the psychological aspects of these 
default(l
defaultong term) 
defaultconditions and to ensure that a support plan takes account of this: depression for example is a major determinant of how an out of hospital support plan works.
defaultObesity as a contributory factor to conditions including diabetes, heart failure and coronary heart disease and how it might be addresseddefaultThe movement of Public Health
default to local councils alongside 
defaultthe 
defaultadult social care
default focus upon wellbeing is creating the right conditions to bring the totality of local resources to bear upon hea
defaultlth inequalities and its
default causes. DASSs
default and Lead Members
default have generally a broad portfolio of servi
defaultces (often including leisure, housing and others) to draw upon and deal with 
defaultthese challenges
default, particularly around prevention and social inclusion.
defaultSocial care services can support the reduction of obesity by always having regard to good nutritional advice and the benefits of any level of physical exercise or activity in both care planning and in service delivery.
default 
defaultAwareness of nutritional
default issues is particularly important
default where a person may have some degree of restricted mobility.
default 
defaultTraining in these areas for personal support planners would be beneficial, as would acce
defaultss for people with LTC
defaults to local health p
defaultromotion services.
default 
defaultThere have also been many examples across the country of councils working with the former Primary Care Trusts to develop ‘Leisure Centre Prescription Schemes’, and tackling obesity should be a shared prevention priority between councils and Clinical Commissioning Groups.
defaultObesity certainly features in Joint Strategic Needs Assessments, and is likely to be 
defaulta priority in the Joint Health and
default Wellbeing Strategies which have been developed.
default 
defaultThese will in future be supported
default and monitored by the HWBs
default.
defaultCurrent examples of effective integration of services across health, social care and other services which treat and mandefaultage long-term conditionsdefaultThere are multiple examples within social care where personalisation and use of personal budgets has led to a significant change both in improving the outcomes people are achie
defaultving, changes in the services and 
defaultsupport they are accessing and the positive impact it has had upon their perc
defaulteptions and experience. T
defaulthe Personal Budget Outcome Evaluation Tool (POET)
default survey 
default2011 
defaultand associated report
default (
defaultattached in a link at the end of this submission
default) provides
default significant evidence ba
defaultsed on individuals’ experiences and
default examples.
defaultBest practice in end of life care within local authority services includes working with a wide range of stake holders such as hospices local colleges, social care providers including care homes, extra care schemes, domiciliary providers and supported living establishments.
default 
defaultThese networks have allowed commissioners to develop innovative approaches and interventions to support a range of service user groups. The recent publication of the National End of Life 
defaultprogramme ‘Sharing
default successf
defaultul strategies for implementing s
defaultupporting people to live and die well
default’
default highlights good
default 
defaultpractice across England demonstrates how effective integration can be to support people with long term conditions and in particular those people nearing the end of their life.
defaultThere is a 30 year tradition of multi-disciplinary working in the
default Community Mental Health Teams and
default Community Learning Disability Teams developed initially to support the closures of long-st
defaultay hospitals from the late 1970
defaults, early 1980
defaults and beyond.
default 
defaultMuch of the learn
defaulting from these
default team
defaults
default, in terms of differing professional cultures, the need for joint training, addressing different assessment systems and processes, is still relevant today in developing integrated working.
defaultIn general terms, there are many current examples of integrated working, which
default will include services for people with LTC’s.
default 
defaultTorbay has often been cited for i
defaultts integrated community health and
default social care services, and North East Lincolnshire re
defaultmained the only ‘Care Trust Plu
defaults’ in the county, with adult social care services delivered within the NHS on behalf of the council.
default 
defaultIn Greenwich, the Royal Borough has developed award-winning integrated services with the community health services of the 
defaultOxleas
default Foundation Trust.
default 
defaultThese are based on a single point of access, a joint emergency response, integrated hospital discharge teams, community asses
defaultsment and rehabilitation teams and
default intermediate care at home teams.
default 
defaultIn respect of long-term conditions, there is clear evidence of improved quality of life, with reductions in emergency admissions and outpatient appointments (as well as significant financial gains).
defaultThe implications of an ageing population for the prevalence and type of long term conditions, together with evidence about the extent to which existing services will have the capacity to meet future demanddefaultThe ADASS
default Budget survey shows 3% demograph
defaultic pressures (about £400m pa ), with
default se
defaultrvices being stretched,
default 
defaultwith fewer
default people receiving services but a
defaultt higher cost and intensity. 
defaultThis points
default to an urgency to consider a whole system approach facilitating switching resources from acute to p
defaultrimary preventative services. 
defaultUnlike when the NHS was set up 65 years ago, now more than half of GP appointments
default and two-thirds of outpatient Accident and 
defaultE
defaultmergency
default visits are for people with long-term illnesses and conditions.
defaultThis group, many of whom are older people, are now responsible for 70% of the total health and care budget, over £70bn every year and that number is growing.
default 
defaultEqually, when 
defaultdiscussing the
default aging population we naturally concentrate on the older age group, but there are also si
defaultmilar issues with substantial 
defaultgrowth in younger people with significant disabilities living much longer, which is fantastic, but presents equally significant challenges in the support they require.
defaultA major element of the growing demand for services to older people is the increased prevalence of dementia.
default 
defaultThis need and the necessary response 
defaultare
default comprehensively covered in the National Dementia Strategy, to which ADASS
default and LGA
default contributed.
default 
defaultIt is clear
default that the progression of dementia can be slowed
default and early diagnosis magnifies the benefits of any subsequent interventio
defaultn.
default 
defaultThe
default 
defaultNational Dementia Strategy takes a social model of disability: so “living well” does not really rely over much on health ser
defaultvices and 
defaultrecognis
defaultes
default the importance of housing, technology, combating stigma,
default dementia friendly communities,
default 
defaultasking the wider community what it can do
default. Another proposal would be to involve the Design Council in innovation.
defaultFinally
default, there
default is a need to recognise increases in demand
default for services for people who suffer strokes, diabetes and cardiovascular conditions.
default Timely and expert treatment can increase longevity, limit disability and promote quality of life.
defaultThe interaction between mental health conditions and long-term physicaldefault health conditionsdefaultThe correlations between lo
defaultng-term and various aspects of mental h
defaultealth, particularly depressive illnesses are well-known.
default 
defaultThis can lead to a self-perpetrating set of interactions such as social withdrawal and reduced mobility, self-neglect, poor nutrition or increasing problems with smoking, drugs or alcohol.
defaultThe interaction of mental health conditions and long-term physical health conditions is well evidenced and reflected in the mental health strategy ' 
defaultNo health without mental health'. 
defaultPoor mental health has a negative impact on 
defaultpeople’s
default long term health care needs and it is estimated that people with long term conditions 
defaultare 2
default-3 times more likely to experience mental health problems than the general population. 
defaultEvidence suggests that there is a strong negative impact on recovery and management of long term conditions for those people who also have mental health needs. This manifests itself in longer periods of time spent in hospital, poor outcomes and lower quality of life. If mental health problems are left untreated, this will also impact negatively on people's ability to self-manage their long term condition (such as diabetes) with people lacking the motivation and ability to do this. 
defaultWhat is 
defaultneeded is
default strong collaboration be
defaulttween primary and mental health
default 
defaultcare 
defaultwith services wrapped around the person rather than conditions. ADASS has worked with the Royal College of Psychiatrists to produce a position paper calling for pooled personal budgets alongside int
defaultegrated assessments across NHS and
default social care, and integrated support plans.
default 
defaultIdeally this could support both the mental health and physical health needs of individuals. 
defaultThe extent to which patients are being offered personalised services (including evidence of their contribution to better outcomes) defaultI
defaultn
default many respects, the introduction of the Independent Living Fund (ILF) in 1988 could be seen as a major early milestone in the development of a personalised approach to supporting disabled people.
default 
defaultWell ahead of the community care reforms, the introduction of Direct Payments and a commitment to universal availability of personal budgets, the ILF allowed people to create their own personalised care arrangements using direct purchasing power.
default 
defaultThe ILF has contributed to major developments such as the support for employment of Personal Assistants, and the role of user-led organisations in advocating for, supporting and providing local services.
defaultThe personal budgets approach is ideal 
defaultfor support for people with LTC
defaults, allowing greater choice and control of care arrangements.
default 
defaultLong-term condition
defaults were a natural focus for the
default piloting of Personal Health Budgets.
defaultIt is arguable that the recent review of ILF has concluded that given the progress of personalisation and prevalence of personal budgets in adult social care, IL
defaultF Funding should transfer to LA
defaults to
default be
default managed in a single 
defaultapproach
default based around the individual. Arguably this
default would also provide LA
defaults the opportunity to review and revise the allocation of such resources based on need
default.
defaultAttached to this response is a
default link to
default the 2011 National Personal Budget Survey published by TLAP. 
defaulthttp://www.thinklocalactpersonal.org.uk/_library/Resources/Personalisation/Personalisation_advice/2011/POET_surveys_June_2011_-_EMBARGOED.pdf
defaultThe 2012 version will be published at the end of May. Below is an excerpt from the executive summary for the 2012 National Personal Budget Survey:
default“
defaultThere is an increasing body of evidence across health and social care that personal budgets have the potential to improve social care and well-being outcomes, for people with long term conditions. This was the clear conclusion of the Personal Health Budgets pilot independent evaluation published in late 2012 and is consistently demonstrated in social care by councils using the Personal Budgets Outcomes Evaluation tool (POET). It will be important to take personal budgets forward across health and social care as a key element of the integration agenda in support of people with long term conditions"
default. 
defaultMay 2013 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default