Written evidence from Professor Alan Maynard (LTC 56)default&#xa0;
defaultAlan Maynard is a Professor of Health Economics, Department of Health Sciences and Hull-York Medical School, University of York. He was a Board member of York Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust from 1983-2010, and was Chairman from 1997-2010. He was appointed 
defaultLay 
defaultChair of NHS Vale of York Clinical Commissioning Group in 2012.
default He is a NHS patient with multiple morbidities
default, appreciating NHS long term care
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultCurrent Policy Assertions
default&#xa0;
default1) Patients with long term conditions could be “better managed” in the community with integrated pathways of care covering personal activity, primary care, local authority and NHS community support and hospitals
default&#xa0;
default2) Such care would offer better process quality, improved outcomes and the potential for cost savings
default&#xa0;
defaultPolicy Problems
default&#xa0;
default1) Commissioners are weak, compared to GP and hospital providers i.e. PCTs/CCGs are price and quality 
defaulttakersdefault rather than price and quality 
defaultmakers. defaultThis problem is evident in both public-NHS and private health care systems i.e. private insurers also tend to be price and quality takers
default&#xa0;
default2) Successive “re-disorganisations” of the NHS since 1974 have failed to remedy this power inequality as evidence
defaultd
default by the following quote from the Francis report on Mid-Staffordshire
default (2013)
default: 
default&#xa0;
default“”Commissioners—not providers-should decide what they want to be provided. They need to take into account what can be provided, and for that purpose will have to consult clinicians both from potential providers and elsewhere, and to be willing to receive proposals, but in the end it is the commissioner whose discretion must prevail”
default&#xa0;
default3) Why are commissioners weak? The answer
defaults to this question are
default quite 
defaultsimple: incentives
default and fragmented care delivery systems in practically all public and private health care systems
default&#xa0;
defaulti) 
defaultThe
default policy “ideal” is that investment in community care is a substitute for care in acute hospital settings. For this to be so, hospital capacity has to be reduced and resources saved transferred, perhaps with economy, to fund community service development
default of good quality
default&#xa0;
defaultii) Sadly this policy ideal may
default not achievable in many cases. Inve
defaultstment in community care may become
default a 
defaultcomplement and not a substitute defaultfor secondary care. The consequence i
defaults that service quality for patie
defaultnts may be enhanced but costs also rise
default&#xa0;
defaultiii) PCTs/CCGs/commissioners can only downsize hospital facilities by mutual agreement with providers. Hospital providers can resist, maintain referrals from GPs and garner income via the PbR system of payment for activity. GPs can be similarly resistant to change. They will resist having to increase care for patients previously treated in hospital unless they are paid. Thus CCGs like their PCT predecessors have little or no leverage on providers other than “moral suasion”.
default&#xa0;
default4) An additional clinical problem is that 
defaultguidelines and pathway advice are
default based on evidence from tria
defaultls exploring the best way to manage single morbidities. Many of the patients with long term conditions have multiple morbidities. The best treatment for one morbidity may deleteriou
defaultsly affect the best treatment for
default another condition. As a consequence
default clinical co-ordination across specialties is essential and has to be resourced.
default C
defaultlinicians have to exercise judgements in collaboration with their colleagues in
defaultvolved in the treatment
default 
defaultof
default mu
defaultltiple morbidities
default. Thus they may not 
defaultalways 
defaultfollow evidence based guidelines for particular conditions.
default&#xa0;
default5) As emphasised for decades
default (e.g. Barbara Castle’s “Priorities in Health and Social Care” 1976)
default, and nicely re-iterated in the 2013 Health Select Committee report on Public Expenditure in the NHS, health and social care production is fragmented into the silos of primary care, acute care (now commissioned by 2 organisations, specialist care by NHS-England, and non-specialist acute care by CCGs), social care 
default(provided by local authorities (LAs), CCGs and the voluntary sector) and public health (also provided by LAs and CCGs). These silos are 
defaultinsulated by
default incentives w
defaulthich support the
default resources
default, 
defaultpower
default and income 
defaultof providers 
defaultrather than 
defaultenhancing 
defaultcollaboration and exploitation of economies of scale
default to advantage the patient and the taxpayer.
default The policy advocacy of the Labour government in the 1970s is remarkably similar to that of the current administration (see Alan Maynard, “Funding health care in times of austerity: what goes around comes around, Journal of Health Service Research and Policy, January, 2013)
default&#xa0;
defaultFour Inter-linked Questions
default&#xa0;
default1)
default 
defaultWhere is the evidence that community care is cost effective?
default&#xa0;
default2) Where is the evidence that that community care can be delivered as a substitute for hospital care, rather than as a complement
default which improves patient care and inflates expenditure
default?
default&#xa0;
default3) Where is the evidence that hospital costs
default and employment
default can be taken out 
defaultand transferred 
defaultto fun
defaultd community care
default?
default&#xa0;
default4) With existing perverse incentives
default which sustain existing providers
default, in particular PbR for hospitals and the GP contract, what reforms are necessary? 
defaultE.g.
default would nurse led primary care be more cost effective?
default&#xa0;
defaultIn seeking
default answers to these questions, one
default result is “we need more research”! 
defaultI.e
default. an evidence base is absent
default despite expensive and extensive “innovation” over decades... There is
default a 
defaultcontinuous 
defaultstorm of 
defaultexpensive 
defaultlocal “innovation” to save money and improve pat
defaultient care
default, often with particular focus on “community care”
default. However this activity
default is not support by evaluati
defaulton which enhances the
default evidence base. As a consequence we do not know whether community care is a complement to specialist care or a substitute for it. The problem is exemplified in Professor Sarah Purdy’s review “Avoiding Hospital Admissions”, Kings Fund
default, 2010 where most of the 
defaultpolicies reported
default are shown to have no evidence base.
default&#xa0;
defaultSome Suggestions for Future Policy
default&#xa0;
default1) 
defaultRequire providers and CCGs to register their plans 
defaultnationally 
defaultfor changes in service delivery with reference to evidence sustaining change where it exists, and where it does not exist lodging their plans for scientific evaluation. 
defaultExisting institutions such as the NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination should be an integral part of NHS investment activity rather than largely ignored by busy managers focused on a “quick fix”.
default&#xa0;
default2) 
defaultAll reforms are social experiments (
defaultDT.
defaultCampbell, 
default“Reforms as experiments” American Psychologist, 
default1969) and as such they should be evaluated to inform future policy choices
default. 
defaultCCGs and providers, public and private, who fail to register innovation
defaults
default 
defaultand evaluate them
default should be fined.
default&#xa0;
default3
default) Train clinical and non-clinical managers in analytical methods so that they can access this knowledge and add to it by leading their teams in policy analysis. This requires radical reform of “leadership” training with emphasis on economics, other social sciences and trial design. 
default&#xa0;
default4
default) Incentivise further researchers supported by public funds to disseminate their work better by demonstrating 
defaultthe policy implications
default of their work. Oblige them to distribute clear and simple one page summaries of their work to NHS and Whitehall users
default e.g. the Health Select 
defaultComittee
default&#xa0;
default5
default) Require all CCG and Hospital business cases to include details if any of the evidence base, and how investment will be evaluated
default. Relate success in complying with this requirement to promotion and sal
defaulta
defaultry increments and decrements
default&#xa0;
default6
default) Create a national capacity to inform health policy reform similar to that provided for medicine by the National Institute for Clinical Excellence
default&#xa0;
default7
default) Sanction limited radical structural experiments with evaluation e.g. the merger of hospitals with a
default co-terminous
default local CCG. Has 22 years of the purchaser-provider divide been efficient? There is no evidence to sustain it so radical experimentation with careful design 
defaultand 
defaultlearning from Scottish, Welsh and New Zealand abandonment of the purchaser-provider divide may be informative
default&#xa0;
defaultFinally
default&#xa0;
defaultInertia 
defaultfuelled
default by faith b
defaultased rhetoric characterises many
default public and private institutions. Everywhere there is lip service 
defaultto 
default“evidence based” decision making and decis
defaulti
defaulton makers neglecting to translate
default words into practice. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTwo physicians invented the term “scepticaemia” They defined it as “an uncommon generalised disorder of low infectivity. Medical school education is likely to confer 
defaultlifelong
default immunity”
default 
defaultP.Skrabanek
default and 
defaultJ.
defaultMcCormick
default, Follies and Fallacies in Medicine, 1989).
default&#xa0;
defaultIn analysing the subject of long term conditions scepticaemia is essential. We must ask always where is the evidence, and where it is offered is it robust or optimistic advocacy?
default&#xa0;
defaultMay 2013
default