Written evidence from the British Society for Allergy &amp; Clinical Immunologydefault (LTC 85)default&#xa0;
defaultWe have only recently become aware of this call for evidence. 
defaultObesity is an increasing epidemic and is a major issue for respiratory conditions, both in terms of making it difficult for people with respiratory conditions to move about (due to the increased work of breathing and their lack of respiratory reserve, and also through the specific conditions of obesity hypoventilation and obstructive sleep apnoea, both of which lead to hypoxia, hypercarbia (excess CO2), pulmonary hypertension and eventually to right heart failure.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, obesity is an issue in relation to difficult asthma. Beyond the general call for strategies to reduce obesity at the community level, we need better 
defaultrecognition
default of the role of obesity in making asthma difficult to control – steroids are not the answer in these patients, many of whom have asthma, and are breathless but not due to airways inflammation. Pre-constriction of their airways plays a large part in rendering them wheezy, and they are at high risk of steroid complications if this is not recognised and they are treated (by guidelines) like asthmatics with normal BMI. 
defaultEducation
default of 
defaultprimary
default care 
defaultteams
default is important, but most of these patients do require specialist support from expert 
defaultteams
default (and many secondary care respiratory 
defaultphysicians
default and A&amp;E doctors are not fully aware of the issues either).
default&#xa0;
defaultAsthma is an important chronic condition – much of it is mild and can be managed in the community – this has been a major objective for respiratory physicians and allergists since the late 1980s when the first national guidelines for asthma were produced. A significant minority have more severe disease, which either requires large doses of standard therapy or fails to respond to standard therapy. Many of these end up on medium to long term oral steroid therapy.
default&#xa0;
defaultWithin the hospital sector we 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultsee those patients whose asthma is difficult to control, either because it is exceptionally severe or because adherence to therapy is poor. And of course we get to see 
defaultthose who have a diagnosis of asthma but do not actually have asthma or those who have more than just asthmadefault 
default–
default these make up quite a large proportion of those with 
default“
defaultdifficult asthma
default”
default in fact, and the reason they don't get better with standard anti-asthma drugs is because they don't have asthma or at least there is more to their symptomatology than just asthma. Failure to recognise this leads to poor control AND to excessive side-effects from over-reliance on oral steroids to control symptom flares.
default&#xa0;
defaultBetter management of these patients requires recognition of the problem by primary and secondary care physicians, and an acknowledgement that this goes beyond the expertise of most secondary chest physicians (although they do not always realise this). Within the specialist services commissioning framework there are plans for a network of tertiary centres whose primary function is to review these patients, separate the wheat from the chaff and get them into appropriate management pathways. While the allergy community feels the number of centres needed to do this should be larger than the number envisaged in the original proposal from the CRG, we accept the general principle that these patients require multidisciplinary assessment by expert teams and should not be managed in conventional general chest clinics.
default&#xa0;
defaultTurning to the definition of Chronic Long-Term Conditions
default, I am not clear whether allergic conditions are regarded as 
defaultCLTCs 
defaultfor the purposes of this inquiry. The call definition 
defaultsays 
default“those conditions that cannot, at present, be cured, but can be controlled by medication and other therapies. The life of a person with a LTC is forever altered – there is no return to ‘normal’.” 
default&#xa0;
defaultOn this basis,
default most non-acute medical conditions would fall into consideration. Chronic eczema would definitely fit in; chronic asthma
default has been discussed above
default; maybe chronic rhinosinusitis
default and perhaps 
defaultseasonal allergic rhinitis
default should be included, as in most cases they cannot be cured, but they can be contained, either by drug therapy or by specific desensitisation.
default&#xa0;
defaultFood allergy is intermittent in its presentation, but 
defaultit has a 
defaultlong term impact on 
defaultpatients and their families, adversely affecting 
defaulttheir quality of life.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn view of the very short time-line for submitting evidence, 
defaultI hope these thoughts are useful. 
defaultI and my colleagues within the British Society for Allergy &amp; Clinical Immunology would be pleased to expand on anything within this letter.
default&#xa0;
defaultMay 2013
default