Written evidence from defaultNuffield Trust default(LTC 96)default&#xa0;defaultsubmission to the Health Committee’s 2013 Inquiry into:defaultManagement of long-term conditions
defaultSummarydefault1.1
defaultMany health systems face the challenge of rising prevalence of chronic health problems 
defaultcoupled with increasing longevity, resulting in more people surviving into old age with multiple chronic conditions.
default 
default 
default 
default 
defaultThe UK has been no exception and over the past decade there 
defaulthas
default been a plethora of policy initiatives designed to reduce the risk of emergency admissions, including case management by community matrons
default, telephone coaching, telehealth
default, virtual wards
default or integrated care. At the national level
default,
default guidance has been developed on best practice for the treatment of common chronic conditions and ﬁnancial incentives devised to 
defaultimprove the management of 
defaultchronic disease in primary care.
default1.2 
defaultA 
defaultbene
defaultﬁt of having a single payer of healthcare with universal coverage is that several years of inpatient data for the whole population are available
default and can
default be used, through time series analyses, to 
defaultexplore 
defaultwhether in
default combin
defaultation
default 
defaultnational and local preventive care initiatives
default 
defaultare having an impact 
defaulton the rates of emergency admissions
default. 
defaultThis can be a useful approach given that n
defaultew initiatives in the NHS are often grafted onto a range of old
defaulter
default ones which
default are still developing
default,
default and
default evaluations of individual
default 
defaultprogrammes 
defaultmight not be undertaken over long enough periods
default,
default 
defaultn
defaultor take account of 
defaultthe interplay of 
defaultdifferent policies and initiatives.
default1.3
default defaultHaving a
default single payer also makes it possible to discern the aggregate balance of spending across different 
defaultsectors
default of the NHS in England
default (
defaulti.e.
default hospital, primary and community services)
default from the annual accounts of strategic health authorities, primary care trusts, NHS and foundation trusts, which are consolidated into annual accounts produced by the Department of Healt
defaulth and Monitor
default. The following submission draws on findings from these data sources, as well as recent modelling work
default 
defaultquantifying the funding pressures facing the NHS in England over
default 
defaultthe decade to 2021/22, and a two
default-
defaultyear
default in-depth
default study of commissioning practice in three high-performing primary care trust (PCT) areas (Calderdale, Somerset and the Wirral).
default 
defaultThe scope for varying the current mix of service responsibilities so that more people are treated outside hospital and the consequences of such service re-design for costs and effectivenessdefault2.1
default defaultBoth the Health
default Committee
default and the National Audit Office
default have previously pointed out
default 
defaultthat the more appropriate use of 
defaultacute 
defaulthospital services is critical for the future achievement of efficiency savings. To achieve this, effective community health services are important, as is 
defaultthe quality of 
defaultprimary care.
default 
defaultOne important gauge of these services’ effect on the health system are rates of admissions for
default 
default 
default 
default‘ambulatory care sensitive conditions (ACS) - 
defaultclinical conditions for which the risk of emergency admission can be reduced by timely and effective ambulatory care, meaning mainly primary care, community
default and social
default services
default,
default and outpatient care. 
default2.2 
defaultA 2013 Nuffield Trust observational study of 
defaulthospital admission data spanning the period between
default March 2001 to April 2011 reveal
defaulted
default that the number of emergency admissions per year for ACS conditions 
defaulthad
default increased over the decade by 40%, rising from 701 995 admissions per year to 982 482 annually.
default 
defaultEmergency admissions for ACS conditions were more common among the oldest and youngest age groups 
defaultWhen the age-standardised rates of emergency admissions for ACS conditions were compared, the overall increase was 25% indicating that 
defaultnot all of th
defaulte decade long
default rise in
default 
default 
default 
defaultadmission rates 
defaultwas
default due 
defaultto the changing demographic structure of the population. The
default overall trend
default also
default 
defaultmasked differences between the three broad categories of ACS conditions (acute, chronic and vaccine preventable).
default 
default 
default 
defaultFor acute ACS conditions the age standardised rate of increase was 44%, while vaccine preventable rates (such as for influenza) went up by 136%, albeit from a much smaller base.
default2.3 
defaultT
defaulthe rate of admissions for chronic ACS conditions held roughly 
defaultsteady. Among
default th
defaultis group
default,
default the conditions
default with the highest rises in the absolute numbers of admissions were chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and convulsions and epilepsy. 
defaultThe number of admissions for diabetes grew by 95% and contributed an extra 16 996 admissions. Meanwhile 
defaultage-standardised
default rates of admissions for congestive heart failure and angina showed marked and significant reductions (--27%
default and -41% respectively
default). 
default2.4 
defaultThere are a number of possible 
defaultexplanations 
defaultfor
default the observed increases in 
defaultthe chronic group of 
defaultACS admissions. For some ACS conditions changes could be due to the differences in the underlying prevalence of disease; changes in health
default-
defaultrelated behaviours such as smoking or improvements in the effectiveness of treatments for 
defaultsome 
defaultdiseases for example, statins for angina. 
defaultOther possible 
defaultexplanations 
defaultinclude 
defaultchanges in the way health systems operate
default, for example changes in the thresholds for admission to hospital. 
defaultI
defaultt
default 
defaultmay be 
defaultthe case that patients admitted now are less sick than they were 10 years ago
default, as 
defaultsuggested 
defaultby the rise in short stay admissions and lower rates of mortality shown in an earlier Nuffield Trust study
default.
default 
defaultOr
default that admission decisions are in part influenced by the perceived lack of alternatives to inpatient care
default (for example an absence of social care or community based alternatives to hospital)
default.
default  
default 
default2.5 
defaultSome caution is required
default as the
default evidence connecting the rising trend
default in ACS admissions
default to specific policies is weak. 
defaultFor example the introduction of the 4 hour A&amp;E target and changes to the GP out of hours contract (both in 2004) are commonly cited as increasing the overall level of emergency admissions, yet our study suggests that emergency admissions continued 
defaulton 
defaultan 
defaultunderlying upward 
defaulttrend at this point, with no obvious 
defaultacceleration 
defaultin
default the rates of
default 
defaultACS 
defaulto
defaultr non-ACS
default emergency
default admissions. Indeed
default some of the more common ACS conditions show trends that closely mirror the rise in rates of emergency admission for non-ACS conditions. This suggests that the organisation and financing of the health system itself are perhaps more important determinants than the changing health needs of the population over the decade
default- specifically the expansion of acute sector capacity from 2002
default.
default We know from the consolidated NHS accounts that community health services have experienced particularly rapid growth in spending since 2006/07. Acute spending also continues to increase but spending on primary care, and in particular GP services, has been falling in recent years
default in real terms
default.
default2.6 
defaultTh
defaultought needs to be given to how 
defaultnational and local policies are impacting on the 
defaultpattern of
default admission for patients, either because of suboptimal preventive ambulatory care, or 
defaultchanges in 
defaultthreshold
defaults
default for admission 
defaultto hospital. 
defaultIt is clear that there is a role for much more comprehensive, independent and transparent 
defaultanalysis of 
defaultpolicies and local initiatives that might make an impact on quality and costs. 
defaultThis work is beginning and 
defaultcould be modelled in line with emerging evidence from research findings, for example the impact of:
default the increased funding of community services since 2006/07;
default service reconfiguration; integrated care
default; workforce skill mix; changes to social care f
defaultunding; and greater use of telehealth and tele
defaultcare
default. 
defaultThe readiness of local NHS and social care services to treat patients with long-term conditions (including multiple conditions) within the communitydefault3.1
defaultIn its June 2011 summary report the NHS Future Forum called for the commissioning of integrated care for patients with long
default-
defaultterm conditions, complex needs and at the end of life. It was an important acknowledgement that the ageing population and increased prevalence of chronic diseases requires a 
defaultdecisive 
defaultshift
default away
default from the current concentration of resources
default in acute 
defaulthospital 
defaultsettings
default towards greater preventive care, 
defaultself-care
default, more consistent standards of primary care and 
defaultcommunity based health and social care 
defaultservices that
default are 
defaultalso 
defaultwell coordinated.
default 
defaultThe Department of Health 
defaultsubsequently 
defaultapproached The King’s Fund and the Nuffield Trust for help in supporting the development of its national strategy on int
defaultegrated care. In our resulting 
defaultreport
default we identified a set of 
defaultorganisational and policy
default barriers that need to be addressed.
default 
default 
default 
default3.2
default defaultThey included: 
default3.3
default defaultSome
default local areas have attempted to 
defaultovercome
default these and other obstacles
default. 
defaultFor example the North West London Integrated Care Pilot (ICP) is a large scale innovative programme designed to improve the coordination of care for people over 75 years of age and adults living with diabetes.
default 
defaultM
defaultultidisciplinary groups of local care providers segment
default pa
defaulttients according to risk; share
default care plans
default across care settings; identify patients needing intensive case management, and mo
defaultnitor care plan implementation.
default 
defaultSophisticated governance structures have been put in place, with all
default staff involved in the pilot, together with representatives of local patie
defaultnt organisations and providers coming
default together 
defaultunder 
defaultan Integrated Management Board (IMB).
default Financial incentives have also been designed to support the aims of the pilot in relation to care planning, collaborative care management, and the development of innovative alternatives to hospital admission.
default3.4
default defaultLikewise NHS organisations in Trafford, a borough 
defaultof
default 215,000 people in Greater Manchester have been trying to develop closer collaboration between community based primary, general acute medicine, specialist outpatient and diagnostic care to enable more care to be delivered outside hospital. 
defaultInitial implementation of the programme involved nine ‘vanguard’ general practices working with community, acute and
default  
default 
defaultsocial care to redesign selected care pathways, share data, identify patients at risk of unplanned hospitalisation, and generally to act as a test bed for implementing and evaluating integrated care.
default3.5
default defaultNeither area is unique in attempting new ways to deliver care closer to the patient. However in terms of scope and ambition they are certainly not the norm. It is perhaps instructive that in both cases there were substantial initial prompts; in the case of Trafford, it was a 
defaultan ambitious PCT and groups of clinicians
default that 
defaultfunded and 
defaultdrove the need for change, while in North West London the set up phase was helped by financial and other support from NHS London; enabling investment in IT, pilot leadership, coordination of multidisciplinary groups and project management. 
defaultWhile recent Government announcements pledging to align policy initiatives in favour of more integrated care
default for a set of ‘pioneers’
default are welcome, it is
default 
defaultalso
default likely that
default other
default l
defaultocal examples of innovation w
defaultill
default emerge as a result of the current spending squeeze
default and 
defaultit is important that these are
default also
default supported and evaluated.
default 
default3. 6
default defaultA key 
defaultdeterminant
default 
defaultwill 
defaultinvolve the extent to which commissioners are supported to balance the possible tensions that can arise when policies in support of competition and choice (and the associated procurement laws) interact with the planned shift to greater 
defaultcoordination of 
defaultcommunity based 
defaultservices. These ought not to be mutually exclusive policies but in practice
default  
default 
defaultthere is a risk that the scope for regulatory action is perceived by commissioners as potentially
default  
default 
defaultbeing so wide and far reaching that it inhibits service redesign and innovation. Second, those commissioners wanting to redesign services appear to be faced with a high burden of proof. Emerging Competition and Cooperation panel guidance
default suggests
default that commissioners and providers will have to show that their actions produce benefits that are ‘significant, quantifiable and evidence based’ to set against the theoretical costs of any reductions in competition and patient choice.
default This is a high threshold of evidence to meet, particularly when the effects of large scale integrated care projects can take several years to emerge fully. 
defaultThe practical assistance offered to commissioners todefault support the design of services defaultwhich promote community-based care and provide for the integration of health and social care in the management of long-term conditionsdefault4.1
default defaultEarlier this year the Nuffield Trust published a major
default National Institute of Health Research-funded
default study exploring
default w
defaulthat commissioners actually do when
default commission
defaulting
default care for people with long-term conditions, and how this might be improved.
default The research was based on 15 months of detailed observation from November 2010 to January 2012 in three commissioning communities: Calderdale, Somerset and the Wirral. These sites were selected because on various indicators they appeared to be at the forefront of commissioning practice. 
defaultT
defaulthe research focused on the commissioning of care for people with long-term conditions: diabetes in all three sites (to allow comparison), and a second condition chosen by each primary care trust: dementia in Calderdale and the Wirral, and stroke in Somerset.
default4.2
default defaultA huge amount of effort was observed going into commissioning across all six service developments, in terms of strategic planning, service review, and hands-on work (typically by middle managers within primary care trusts) to implement and support change.
default The research further revealed that the commissioning 
defaultwas not seen 
defaultas a two-sided transaction across the ‘purchaser–provider split’, at least where long-term conditions are concerned. Local commissioners were instead developing an alternative approach based on c
defaultollaborative 
defaultworking between providers and commissioners.
default 
default 
default 
defaultWhile there are clear benefits to this, in terms of clinicians driving change, there are also risks; including potential conflicts of interest, for example providers using senior clinicians to help ward off cha
defaultllenges from 
defaultcommissioners
default, or providers being actually involved in design of services for which they subsequently tender.
default 
default4.3
default defaultThe study concluded
default defaultthat 
defaultcommissioning is a 
defaultlabor-intensive
default 
defaultactivity
default, often concentrated on relatively marginal rather than mainstream service developments
default.
default 
defaultIt was also noted to be
default much more relational 
defaultthan transactional in nature, with commissioners appearing reluctant to engage in challenge of providers and decommissioning, preferring to focus on service planning and design, involvement and consultation with local stakeholders, and 
defaultimplementation of new developments
default. In the 
defaultnew commissioning system
default, 
defaultgiven 
defaultrecent 
defaultmanagement cost reductions of some 40 per cent, clinical commissioning groups will have to be very selective about how they allocate their time and effort. 
defaultCommissioners’ traditional role of as convenors
default of the local health system
default may also have to adapt, or at the very least be scaled back - they
default will need to be brave enough to ‘cut and run’ and make 
defaultdifficult 
defaultdecision
defaults
default when they feel they have undertaken enough consultation and engagement, even if this flies in the face of NHS (provider and commissioner) culture that favours extensive involvement and consultation as a way of reviewing and making changes to services.
default4.4
default defaultThe implication of this is that done well, commissioning can be a lonely role, especially when it involves the ‘tough work’ of chang
defaulting
default 
default 
default 
defaultservices
default - work
default that 
defaultis
default likely at times to threaten professional and provider interests, or prove unpopular with some in the wider community. 
defaultC
defaultommissioners will need intelligence from commissioning support units to challenge providers on quality and value for money,
default and 
defaultwhere necessary, 
defaultuse procurement to let 
defaultcontracts 
defaultfor 
defaultservices for their populations. This should include high-quality public health and needs assessment advice, sophisticated and real-time data about services, accurate comparisons with national benchmarks, efficient payment and invoicing systems, and support for modelling and planning future care. In addition, 
defaultcommissioners 
defaultwill need support in undertaking 
defaultpublic 
defaultconsultation, accessing and analysing patient and public experience data, providing local system leadership, and handling procurement within a cultural context of collaboration.
defaultThe implications of an ageing population for the prevalence and type of long term conditions, together with evidence about the extent to which existing services will have the capacity to meet future demanddefault5.1
default defaultPopulation growth and demographic change are fundamental drivers of future health care activity. Clearly,
default as a population grows, demands
default for health care will rise. Additionally, a population with a 
defaulthigher
default proportion of older people will have a greater need for health care. While health service utilisation tends to increase with age, t
defaulthere is additional use of 
defaulthealth services as people approach the end of their life
default, regardless of 
defaultage. This increase is less
default 
defaultpronounced for people aged over 85 years, but is still evident. Use of health services is
default 
defaultthus dependent not just on ageing, but also on the number of people who are expected to
default 
defaultdie at any particular time.
default5.2
default defaultOur December 2012 report mapping the medium term NHS productivity challenge used the principal ONS projections from 2008 for population, mortality and fertility to 
defaultcreate a projection to 2021/22.
default The population is projected to grow for all age groups of 50 years and above, for both males
default and females. The probability of having an inpatient admission related to a chronic condition is higher for older age groups than younger age groups. Admissions linked to chronic conditions are therefore likely to rise as the population ages. However, recent trends suggest that this probability is also rising within age bands. If this trend continues, the impact on the NHS due to chronic conditions will amplify the effect of population growth alone.
default5.3
default defaultFor primary care, we examined trends in the number of times a year individuals visit their GP. The number of consultations at a GP practice per person per year rose from 3.9 in 1995/96 to 5.5 in 2008/09. Over the same period, the proportion of these consultations occurring with a GP, rather than a practice nurse, fell from 75 per cent in 1995/96 to 62 per cent in 2008/09. We have assumed that both of these trends will continue over the period 2010/11 to 2021/22, so that by 2021/22 there will be 7.8 consultations per person per year; 55 per cent of which will be with a GP.
default 
defaultWe applied a similar technique to the mental health model to predict how many people would require mental health services each year, based on the number of people using services between 2008/09 and 2010/11. This projection would see the proportion of people aged over 65 years using mental health services growing by just over 50 per cent by 2021/22
default.
default5.4
default defaultFurther protection of the NHS budget is not guaranteed due to the uncertainty of the economic outlook for the country. Our analysis concluded that without unprecedented, sustained increases in health service productivity
default, including more effective management of chronic conditions
default, funding for the NHS in England will need to increase in real terms between 2015/16 and 2021/22 to avoid cuts to the service or a fall in quality. Yet with no clear signs of economic recovery, it is conceivable that NHS funding may be frozen for further years. If this is the case, a major rethink of how health services in England are funded and organised will be needed.
default It is crucial, therefore, that the NHS becomes much better at preventing and managing long-term conditions.
default  
default 
default  
default 
default  
default 
defaultENDS
defaultMay 2013
default Steventon A, Bardsley M, Billings J et al (2011) 
defaultAn evaluation of the impact of community based interventions on hospital use.
default Nuffield Trust
default Steventon A and Bardsley Steventon A and Bardsley M (2012) 
defaultThe impact of telehealth on use of hospital care and mortality
default. Nuffield Trust
default Lewis, G, Bardsley M, Vaithanathan R et al
default. ‘Do “virtual wards” reduce rates of unplanned hospital admissions and at what cost? A research protocol using propensity matched controls. 
defaultInternational Journal of Integrated Care. Volume 11, 30 June 2011
default Health Select Committee (2012) 
defaultPublic Expenditure: Thirteenth report of session 2010–12
default. The Stationery Office. 
default National Audit Office (2012) 
defaultProgress in Making NHS Efficiency Savings
default Report by the Comptroller and Auditor General, HC 686, Session 2012–13. The Stationery Office
default Bardsley M, Blunt I, Davies S et al. ‘Is secondary preventive care improving? Observational study of 10 year trends in emergency admissions for condition amendable to ambulatory care’. 
defaultBMJ Open 2013;3:e002007.doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2012-002007
default 
default 
defaultBlunt I, Bardsley M and Dixon J (2010) 
defaultTrends in emergency admissions in England 2004-2009
default. Nuffield Trust. London
default Jones N and Charlesworth A (2013) 
defaultThe Anatomy of health spending 2011/12: A review of NHS expenditure and labour productivity
default. Nuffield Trust
default Ling T, Bardsley M, Adams J. ‘Evaluation of UK Integrated Care Pilots: research protocol. 
defaultInternational Journal of Integrated Care. 
defaultVol
default 10, September 2010
default Steventon A and Bardsley M (2012)
default 
defaultThe impact of telehealth on use of hospital care and mortality. Nuffield Trust
default Ham C, Smith J, 
defaultEastmure
default E (2011) Commissioning integrated care in a liberated NHS. Nuffield Trust, London
default Goodwin N, Smith J, 
defaultDavies A
default et al (2012) Integrated care for patients and populations: Improving outcomes by working together. King’s Fund &amp; Nuffield Trust
default Nuffield Trust &amp; Imperial College London (2013) 
defaultEvaluation of the first year of the Inner North West London Integrated Care Pilot
default. Nuffield Trust, London
default Shaw S and Levenson R (2011) 
defaultTowards integrated care in Trafford
default. Nuffield Trust, London
default Nuffield Trust (2013) 
defaultParliamentary Briefing: NHS procurement, patient choice and competition (Response to draft regulations
default). London
default Smith J, Porter A, Shaw S et al (2013) 
defaultCommissioning high quality care for people with long term conditions. Nuffield Trust
default [also need to have the main NIHR report as a reference – NIHR will be cross otherwise]
default Roberts A, Marshall L, Charlesworth A (2012) 
defaultA Decade of Austerity? The Funding Pressures facing the NHS from 2010/11 to 2021/22. 
defaultNuffield Trust
default