&#xa0;
defaultJoint wrdefaultitten evidence submitted by defaultProfessor Greg Philo and Dr Catherine Happerdefault (CLC51)defaultExecutive Summary
default1. 
defaultThere are two crucial points which we want to make.  The first is that the key to changing environmental behaviours lies in the imposition of constraints on public 
defaultaction
defaults.  We found widespread sympathy with the issue of climate change, and broad acceptance that certain behaviours would have to be curbed or de-incentivised.  But there is little trust in the feasibility or potential impact of encouraging changes in individual behaviour.  Change would therefore come from new public constraints to which everyone must accede – as, for example, in the case of the compulsory wearing of seat belts.  In the same way people would accept, 
defaultsay
default, constraints on air travel if it were seen as a public good and applying to all.
default2. 
defaultTo generate a consensus around such policies requires a new approach to media and the dissemination of expert knowledge.  Our research shows that politicians as a group are burdened with a very low level of public trust.  New messages on climate change are likely to be seen as merely the expression of private interests.  Yet the input of politicians is crucial since they as a group can set agendas in terms of media coverage and can command regular access to key information providers such as the BBC.  The solution to this problem is to form a close bond with scientists, who still enjoy a high level of public trust.  The scientists must be seen as stimulating the debate and informing the political actions.  This was the key to 
defaultthe 
defaultsuccess of the AIDS/HIV campaigns and to long term changes in health 
defaultrelated
default behaviours such as smoking.  This model provides the possibilities of successful political action based on a high degree of social consent.  
defaultAbout
default3. 
defaultFor over thirty years The Glasgow University Media Group (GUMG) 
defaulthas promoted the development of new methodologies and substantive research in the area of media and communications. Professor Greg Philo has been the Research Director of the group for 20 years.   In that time it has 
defaultpioneered research methods focussing on the use of language in news and other media formats and ha
defaults
default investigated how meanings are established for audiences. The studies 
defaultare 
defaultused extensively across the social sciences and by researchers in areas such as risk analysis, mental health and other areas of social policy. Greg has presented findings at both the Institute of Biology and the Royal College of Psychiatrists.  The work has been widely published and Greg has been invited to present our studies at a range of international fora, including Paris 2004, Sorbonne nouvelle and Paris VIII  universities, Amsterdam 2004, International Documentary Festival, national conferences of the Media and Cultural Studies Association of Britain, 2008 and Images of Islam international conference, Manchester University, 2008. Other lectures by invitation include, Fudan University, Shanghai, China, 2009 and Al Jazeera Forum Qatar 2011. 
default4. 
defaultDr Catherine Happer was awarded a First in Sociology from the University of Glasgow and the Adam Smith prize as the top student of her year, then went on to complete a PhD in communications from Lancaster University. She worked in the BBC audience research department and later as a Television Researcher/Assistant Producer before returning to the University of Glasgow as Research Associate at the Glasgow University Media Group to work on a UKERC-funded project 
defaultalong with Chatham House 
defaultlooking at communications around climate change and energy security.  This work has been presented 
defaultto 
defaultrepresentatives of the Foreign Office, the Department for Energy and Climate Change and from many other NGOs, think tanks and activist groups. In 2013 
defaultshe was 
defaultinvited to present 
defaultthe
default work to the 
defaultEuropean Climate Communications Officers Net
defaultwork (ECCO) conference in Oslo. 
defaultAlong with Professor Philo, she is 
defaultcurrently co-authoring a book 
defaultcalled 
defaultCommunicating Climate Change and Energy Security: New Methods in Understanding Audiences, to be published by Routledge in October.
defaultFindings from the UKERC-funded study: 
default5. 
defaultThe current state of public understanding of climate
default change is one 
defaultof 
defaulthigh 
defaultconfusion and low understanding.  
default  
defaultThere is blanket awareness of the term but 
defaultonly a small minority 
defaultcan give a clear and consistent explanation of the potential caus
defaultes and risks
default without prompting
default.  Whilst 
defaultthe majority 
default(
default86%
default) 
defaultsee human behaviour as a cause of climate change
default, there is no consensus on it being the primary cause
default.  Just over a tenth of our sample (14%) did not believe that anthropogenic climate change was happening.  
default 
defaultThe main reason for scepticism was the belief that changes in climate take place historically, and the current changes are simply part of natural cycles
default.  
defaultHowever, the large majority 
default(88%
default) 
defaultbelieve that action on climate change is important, even if they are not sure exactly what that might mean
default.  
default&#xa0;
default6. 
defaultWe also found 
defaulta marked tendency to use climate change as an umbrella term for a number of other environmental issues such as pollution and
default population growth.  There is a widespread
default causal connection with climate change and the ozone layer.  For example, in our research, the ozone layer was associated with climate change with far greater frequency than, say, CO2 em
defaulti
defaultssions.  
defaultThe most frequently made association across our sample 
default(by 30%) 
defaultwas with weather changes directly experienced such as changing seasonal patterns and wetter Summers, though extreme weather at the local and global level
default, most often drawn from media accounts,
default w
defaultas
default also named.  
default7. 
defaultIn terms of changes over time in public un
defaultderstanding, a very useful overview of the British public’s attitudes and understandings has been done by Upham el al (2009)
default which shows that awareness and self-reported knowledge of climate change has been rising over the last two decades.  However a confusion of depletion of the ozone layer with climate change, for example, has remained fairly consistent in this time
default.  
default8. 
defaultThe attribution of trust
default and credibility
default in relation to sources of information on climate science and policy is a complex process in an environment in which there are multiple voices engaged in the debate across a range of media.  We found that television news is still the first place that people hear about what is happening in the world
default, 
defaultthough they 
defaultsometimes 
defaultfollow TV reports with independent research on the internet in order to provide clarity or to substantiate what has been reported. 
default In this sense, credibility is weighed up in relation to consistency of information and the accountability of the individual speaker.  However, we found that the BBC, across media, remains a highly trusted source –
default 
defaultit was felt to be the least partial, and most serious about addressing the issues.  
default9. 
defaultA further group to which a high level of trust was attributed was the scientists, academics and other experts – speakers who are 
defaultdirectly involved in research, and possessed of the 
defaultexpertise and knowledge which other sources such as journalists and television producers would draw on
default in producing media accounts
default.  However, in spite of the trust invested in the scien
defaulttists and other experts, questions were raised about the validity of the science of climate change.  There were two aspects to this: the first is the suggestion that the arguments around climate change are theoretical and cannot be easily proved or disproved, and the second is that, as a result, the scientists contradict each other and there is a lack of consistency within the science community.  
defaultWe found that, without prompting, participants rarely referred to the existence of any consensus amongst the scientists, although a recent survey showed that 97% of peer-reviewed scientific papers agree that man-made climate change is happening
default.  Instead the perceived 
default‘woolly’ nature of the evidence led to a belief that the science was open to interpretation
default.  It was further widely believed that 
defaulta range of speakers, such as politicians and representatives from the business community, 
defaultinterpreted the science 
defaultto meet their own agendas
default.  
defaultThe view that media coverage was agenda-led - and, in the extreme, mere ‘propaganda’ 
default- 
defaultwas widely expressed. 
default10. 
defaultPoliticians were most named 
default(by 28%) 
defaultas the source not to be trusted on climate change, which reflected a wider sense of distrust and cynicism about public figures in general.  The expenses scandal of 2009 was cited as a key reason for this, but broken manifesto pledges and the lack of attention paid to public protests were also mentioned.  The lack of trust in political players in general was transferred to their handling of climate change and implementation of policy.  
defaultThe low level of public trust combined with the belief in the lack of solidity of the scientific evidence led to difficulty in knowing who to trust, which our research showed had a direct impact on levels of engagement with the issue.  
default11. 
defaultIn view of the role of Government Departments and members of the scientific community in communicating climate science, it is our strong belief that there should be a shift 
defaultin focus 
defaultwith the latter taking a more public role and propelling the arguments forward in the public sphere.  
defaultThe arguments need to be contextualised by the scientific knowledge, de-politicised and presented as evidence-based rather than as conjecture.  
defaultThere are however difficulties associated with this.  Firstly that the science is complex and journalists struggle to find ways to engage audiences which is, of course, their primary concern.  Further, partially as a result of this aim, the media have often drawn 
defaulton ‘experts’ 
default- sometimes called climate sceptics - 
defaultwithout the appropriate credentials to speak on climate science 
defaultto fuel debate
default.  
defaultThere is evidence that these sceptics are a well organised and well funded group with the aim of discrediting climate science and downplaying the need for action
default – as a result they are vocal in publicising their views.  This stands in contrast to 
defaultclimate scientists and other experts in the area of climate change who are reluctant to do so.  
defaultHowever if the scientists developed high 
defaultprofile public roles, it 
defaultwould reduce the capacity for the sceptics to challenge their credibility.
default  This would make it simpler for audiences to identify tho
defaultse sources of trust and to focus on accurate information.
default  
defaultOur research also showed the 
defaultimportance of the reinforcement of media messages
default suggesting a key part of building these public roles is to be prolific in spreading their knowledge.  
default12. 
defaultThe role of the p
defaultolitical speakers in this process lies in their agenda-setting powers.  In recent years an equal if not more significant problem in climate change communications is that there has not 
defaultbeen enough of it.  Since 2010 
defaultthere has been a global and national decline in the coverage of climate change
default and our research showed that this impacts on the public’s sense of it being a pressing problem.  Simply if it is in the news, it is more likely to be thought of as a priority and to play on people’s minds.  This decline is due to a number of factors but one reason is that the media 
defaulttake their lead from the official sources upon which they are reliant on for their information.  Politicians are the most significant of this group. The BBC, in particular, sets its agenda on the basis of the political debate as a key aspect of its role is to present the range of views in a democracy in which parliament is seen to represent the will of the people.  In essence therefore the boundaries of parliamentary debate form the core of the political arguments which it features.  
defaultClimate change has not been a major priority of the 
defaultcoalition government – and
default the dissent over climate change and related issues was exposed through the internal conflict over the Energy Bill and the lack of promotion of the latter 
defaultfrom the major political players including the Prime Minister since coming into office, suggest a real lack of political will in this area. 
default  
defaultThe media therefore has reflected that lack of priority. 
default13. 
defaultWhilst we would argue the scientists should take centre stage in the coverage, it therefore lies
default with the politicians to 
defaultopen up the 
defaultmedia landscape.  
defaultPoliticians 
defaultneed to promote the i
defaultssue and raise
default the profile of the scientists
default and independent experts, such as engineers, 
defaultas a unified group who are arguing the case for evidence-based policy.  Central to this is the communicative relationship between scientists, Government Departments and journalis
defaultts from the full range of media, but the evidence must be seen to be coming from the scientists.  In relation to the aforementioned difficulties that journalists face in covering as complex an issue as climate change, 
defaultleading figures
default,
default such as Profes
defaultsor Lord Stern, 
defaulthave argued 
defaultfor a communicative approach that frames the issue in terms of risk rather than uncertainty, which is something both journalists and audiences struggle to grapple with.  
defaultSimple messages about risks in relation to extreme weather events, for example, which centralise the scientific arguments about risks may be a potential way forward.  
default14. 
defaultWith climate change, perhaps more so than any other policy issue, it is imperative that 
defaultthe public 
defaultunderstand
default the issues and the importance of action to be taken.  
defaultImproved 
defaultunderstanding and 
defaultgreater 
defaultsympathy with the issue can both legitimise policy action and therefore facilitate change at the collective level.  This is particularly important in the context of austerity in which any investment and expenditure need to be justified.  
defaultThe 
defaultreduction in carbon emissions - by 34% by 2020 and at least 80% by 2050 - enshrined in law through the 2008 Climate Change Act will not be 
defaultmet without individual action. 
defaultThe likelihood of effective collective action happens in the intersection between sympathetic attitudes and structurally imposed and supported behaviours.  
defaultOu
defaultr research showed that there is currently
default little faith in the power of individual behaviours conducted in isolation.  The 
defaultcynicism about 
defaultpublic figures, and resultant feelings of distrust, found in our research indicates that initiatives which rely on voluntary behavioural changes are unlikely to be widely engaged with.  However, we did find in our groups, 
defaultin the majority, a clear sense that decisive action would have to be taken.  
defaultThere 
defaultwas an acceptance, for example, that air travel might have to be curbed or made more expensive.  Such action 
defaultwas expected 
defaultto be initiated at the governmental or local authority 
defaultlevel.  It seems likely that if a clear lead was given then the public would, however grudgingly, accept it.  This is actually the history of public acceptance of legislation on issues such as wearing seat belts in cars or
default motor cycle crash helmets, but
default it 
defaultdoes 
defaultrequire organised collective action. 
default 
defaultCounter to this, i
defaultn relation to the role of public communicati
defaultons about 
defaultclimate change
default policy
default and initiatives
default, there is little point in driving home the message about behavioural change unless there are simple, effective and supported solutions open to people from which they can see the real benefits. 
default15. 
defaultIn relation to the question of the knowledge and expertise that the Government have in the area of public understanding of climate science and the response to public policies, there has been some criticism of the way in which DEFRA, and other agencies, attempt to motivate social behaviours by the use of external drivers such as pro-environmental materials which does not take account of 
defaultbroader systemic issues
default.  But whilst these issues are clearly significant – people are unlikely to take up cycling to work without the protection of a network of cycle lanes - we argue this does 
defaultnot sufficiently account for the way the media shape possibilities within those bounds.  
default 
defaultThe range of the work of the Glasgow University Media group has showed the conditions under which new information produced sometimes radical changes in behaviour – for example, in our work on HIV/AIDS, we analysed the differing effects of the government campaign on changes in condom use and sexual behaviour.  The link between smoking and cancer has also clearly produced substantial behavioural change.  But there are also examples in which new information does not produce such changes and the literature illustrates that information on climate change often fails to do so.  Our research would strongly suggest that one of the reasons is that the information in the area of climate change is so widely contested that there is no simple understanding which could lead to engagement with or without all the other cultural and social considerations.
default  
defaultT
defaulthere is 
defaultalso 
defaulta lack of research looking into the kinds of informatio
defaultn
default, and factors such as source, context and media, which might 
defaultlead to commitments to alter behaviour
default – which would also allow for the potential impact of other factors which 
defaultmight overwhelm responses to information, as well as those cases in which the opposite is the case.  
defaultIt is this lack that our research sought to redress and the 
defaultrelated question of what would be the 
defaultmost effective approach to commu
defaultnications about climate change – which we have addressed in this statement to some degree - 
defaultwe believe needs further research.  
defaultNotes 
defaultThe project report is available at:
default 
defaulthttp://www.chathamhouse.org/publications/papers/view/188145
default&#xa0;
defaultJune 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultUpham, P., Whitmarsh, L., Poortinga, W., Purdam, K., Darnton, A., McLachlan, C. and Devine-Wright, P. (2009
default) 
default‘
defaultPublic Attitudes to Environmental Change: A Selective Review of Theory and Practice. A Research Synthesis for the Living with Environmental Change Programme’,
default 
defaultResearch Councils UK, 
defaulthttp://www.lwec.org.uk/sites/default/files/001_Public%20attitudes%20to%20environmental%20change_final%20report_301009_1.pdf
default (accessed: 5
defaultth
default April, 2013). 
default  
defaultJohn Cook
default&#xa0;
defaultet al (2013
default)
default ‘Quantifying the consensus on anthropogenic global warming in the scientific literature’, 
defaultEnviron. Res. Lett.
default&#xa0;
default8default&#xa0;
default024024.  
defaultdoi:10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024
default.
default Research conducted by The Guardian and discussed in these articles:  Goldenberg, S.  (2013) ‘Media campaign against wind farms funded by anonymous conservatives’, 
defaultThe Guardian,
default 15
defaultth
default February 2013, 
defaulthttp://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2013/feb/15/media-campaign-windfarms-conservatives
default and Monbiot, G. (2013) ‘The educational charities that do PR for the rightwing ultra-rich’ in 
defaultThe Guardian
default, 18
defaultth
default February, 2013, 
defaulthttp://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/feb/18/charities-pr-rightwing-ultra-rich
default Fischer, D. (2013) ‘Climate coverage, dominated by weird weather, falls further in 2012’ 
defaultThe Daily Climate
default, 2nd Jan, 2013,  
defaulthttp://wwwp.dailyclimate.org/tdc-newsroom/2013/01/2012-climate-change-reporting
default  
default 
defaultShove E, (2010) ‘Beyond the ABC: climate change policy and theories of social change’,
default Environment and Planning A 
default42:6, pp. 1273 – 1285.
default  
default