Written Evidence of Ian Evansdefault&#xa0;defaultSummarydefaultI am a victim of Jersey corruption of some twenty five years, and I am writing to the Committee in the hope of achieving some small strand of justice and rule of law for myself and my fellow islanders. It is quite evident that Jersey government is a Feudal criminal regime run for those who have, whilst completely disregarding the wishes and concerns of those who have not. Below is a detailed list of the many problems that I have personally encountered within the system and its operations. Please take note that these instances are extremely well evidenced and documented. I am more than happy to give detailed evidence at any Justice Committee hearing should I be required to do so.
default&#xa0;
defaultPolice issues that must be addressed.default1. The dishonesty of police officers when filing statements of incidents.
default2. The shocking rate of police assaults when arresting individuals for misdemeanours.
default3. The ever increasing instances of perjury committed by police officers when giving court evidence.
default4. Failure by the police to even acknowledge complaints of criminality against fellow officers or other agents of government.
default5. Refusal by the police to disclose evidence of criminality against themselves or their fellow officers, or other agents of government.
default6. The refusal of senior officers to address complaints within a reasonable time frame (some cases over two years).
default7. The refusal to suspend any officer accused of a serious crime.
default8. The refusal to initiate independent investigation of serious crimes by police officers or agents of government.
default&#xa0;
defaultCourt issues that must be addressed.default9. The refusal of Magistrates/Judges/Commissioners/Jurats to confirm and operate under their Oath of Office when challenged to do so.
default10. The utter refusal of Magistrates/Judges/Commissioners/Jurats to acquit an accused when no evidence of wrongdoing has been submitted to the Court.
default11. The doctoring of trial recordings in the Royal Court before said recordings are sent for transcription.
default12. The doctoring of trial recordings in the Magistrates Court before said recordings are sent for transcription.
default13. The refusal of the Courts to provide clear guidelines on sentencing policy.
default14. The refusal of the Courts to provide copies of the law to litigants in person written in a language they understand.
default15. The refusal of the Courts to acknowledge ECHR and UDHR rights and freedoms.
default16. The regularity with which magistrates commit fraud on the Court and on the people when dealing with alleged debt, fines, etc. etc.
default&#xa0;
defaultLawyer/Advocate defaultissues that must be addressed.default17. The alarming manner in which lawyers and advocates bow to the Courts wishes when allegedly defending their clients.
default18. The extortionate charges levelled against those with no ability to pay.
default19. The disgraceful monopoly to practice that exists for Jersey lawyers.
default20. The manner in which lawyers lie to, and even blackmail their clients, when their overriding duty is to protect corrupt acts of criminality by other agents of government.
default21. The pitiful complaints process undertaken by the Jersey Law Society when dealing with complaints against fellow lawyers, and the Law Society’s refusal to make available for scrutiny, documents that they have relied on to acquit their fellow club members.
default22. The outright refusal of some lawyers/advocates to do as they are instructed by their clients.
default&#xa0;
defaultGeneral Law issues that must be addressed.default23. The astonishing refusal of the Home Affairs Department, the Bailiffs Office, and the Office of Lieutenant Governor to address matters of corruption, or to even give a response to most complaints.
default24. The conflicts of interest that are constantly ignored by these government bodies.
default25. The inability of the Judicial Greffe to supply anything written in English that is required by litigants in person (rules of procedure) etc. etc.
default26. The complete failure of the Crown Dependencies Team to deal with complaints of a criminal nature from Jersey. Said complaints being dismissed instantly via an unsigned template letter, then the matter being reverted back to Jersey to be dealt with by the criminals complained of?
default27. Perhaps the most alarming point in my evidence is that there is no ability in Jersey (so we are told) to take out a private criminal prosecution against those who have wronged us. I am reminded 
defaultconstantly that the Attorney General is the sole prosecuting authority on the island, if he does not want to prosecute, there is no remedy open to the common man for redress, this is so wrong.
default&#xa0;
defaultI shall cut off at this point as I could write reams on this subject. I hope my evidence has enlightened, and indeed, alarmed the Committee, and that the Committee Members will heed and seek to reform the dire situation that is so obviously affecting the rights and freedoms of the good people of Jersey.
default&#xa0;
defaultI am grateful to the Committee for their time and effort in reviewing the issues that I have raised.
default&#xa0;
default