VEP 0040
default&#xa0;
defaultSubmission by Professor Sir Francis Jacobs VEP 0040defaultFurther note on EU lawdefault1.
default              
defaultIt may be helpful to add a further note on EU law, on which I was not questioned
default at the public hearing
default. My view on EU law is set out in my paper at 1.2.11. A different view is taken by Martin Howe QC in his paper.  The main question is whether the Court’s ruling can be transposed to elections to the European Parliament as a matter of EU law.  The EU Charter of Fundamental Rights does not deal with elections to national parliaments, but it does include as a fundamental right the right to vote in elections to the European Parliament.  Charter rights which correspond to Convention rights are to be interpreted in the same way as Convention rights (see Article 52(3) of the Charter).
default2.
default              
default Martin Howe says (at 21) that there is no correspondence here between the Convention and the Charter because their scope of application is different: Article 3 of the First Protocol applies to national elections, while Article 39 of the Charter applies to elections to the European Parliament.  However, he appears to overlook the point that elections to the European Parliament – which is part of our legislature – do fall within Article 3 of the First Protocol: see 
defaultthe judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in 
defaultMatthews v United Kingdom 
default(1999).  So
default the Charter right does correspond to the Convention right.  Accordingly a blanket ban on prisoner voting in 
defaultelections to the European Parliament
default does
default infringe EU law.  The European Court of Justice would be likely to rule to that effect.
default3.
default              
default  Martin Howe has a further reason for referring to the risk that Article 3 
defaultof the First Protocol 
defaultmight be regarded as relevant, as a matter of interpretation, for elections to the European Parliament.  That
default risk
default, he says, “strongly reinforces the desirability of the UK withdrawing from the First Protocol, and doing so as soon as possible”.  But I do not think that he is correct on that point either. 
defaultDenunciation by the United Kingdom of the First Protocol
default would not affect the interpretation by the European Court of Human Rights of Article 3 
defaultof the First Protocol; 
defaultand 
defaultdenunciation 
defaultwould not affect the 
defaultinterpretation (ultimately for the European Court
default of Justice
default)
default o
defaultf
default Article 39 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which 
defaultis
default to be interpreted in line with Article 3 of the First Protocol.
default4.
default              
defaultD
defaultenunciation of the First Protocol, while it would remove the need to amend UK legislation as regards elections to the UK Parliament for the future, would not affect the obligation to comply with judgments already given before the denunciation took effect, including any awards by the Court of compensation
default.
default 
defaultDenunciation
default would 
defaultalso 
defaultnot 
defaultaffect the existing obligation under EU law to amend UK legislation concerning elections to the European Parliament
default so as to remove the blanket ban on prisoner voting in thos
defaulte
default elections.
defaultJuly 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default