&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Peabody Trustdefault&#xa0;
defaultThe changes to housing support through the Welfare Reform Act have led Peabody to take a multiple pronged response. A Welfare Reform Group was set up to discuss the implications and best practice. This led to a rolling programe of awareness raising and adv
defaultice. Following on from this, the Peabody Lettings Team have worked jointly with local authorities to hold sessions where interested residents can meet for mutual exchange discussion. The Peabody employment and training team have worked with clients to impr
defaultove job readiness.
defaultThe Welfare Benefits team within Peabody have worked to co-ordinate these approaches. In addition, we have looked to maximize income and assist in gathering evidence to demonstrate overnight care needs where appropriate. Where none of th
defaultese approaches have had immediate effect, we have applied for Discretionary Housing Payments for clients with a reasonably positive effect. 
defaultWhat is clear is that as much information around reforms must be made public as early as possible. This has allowed
default 
defaultPeabody to advise claimants and give claimants an opportunity to prepare and exercise choices earlier, rather than creating a bottle-neck when everyone seeks assistance at once.
defaultIt would be useful to examine further ways to create work incentives. If the 
defaultunder occupation penalty was expressed as a % of Housing Benefit payable as opposed to the total rent there wo
defaultuld be more of a work incentive.
defaultLike oth
defaulter Registered Social Landlords, Peabody has seen an increase in arrears. Residents are struggling to meet a 14% or 25% increase in the contribution of their rent if they have spare bedrooms, against a backdrop of 1% benefit increases or below inflation pay
default rises. 
defaultPeabody does not have enough one bedroom properties for those who are under occupied to move into. Although residents are pro-actively looking for exchanges or transfers, demand hopelessly outstrips supply. Residents who cannot realistically take 
defaultpaid employment, or take enough hours to float off of benefits are essentially doomed to face repossession action.
defaultA further problem is that claimants themselves are identifying that they don’t feel confident that they will pay the rent directly to Peabody
default. Claimants admit that other creditors will be more forceful knowing they have rent money paid directly under Universal Credit. Claimants also admit that with limited money from benefit 
defaultpayments, the temptation to dip into rent money will be g
defaultreat, especia
defaultlly at Christmas and other peak periods of consumer demand. 
defaultWhilst it is a laudable aim that claimants manage money better, it might be more suitable to aim this at the most job ready first. If the direct payment were trialed at WTC and JSA claimants firs
defaultt, it could be evaluated properly. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDiscretionary Housing Payments have been a life line where claimants have used the breathing space to look towards downsizing and pursue 
defaultemployment opportunities. Peabody has encouraged claimants receiving DHPs to make partial payments and therefore build up a further buffer zone before facing full shortfalls.
defaultHowever, for those claimants furthest from the employment market and in less desi
defaultrable properties, a DHP is realistically only delaying the inevitable rent arrears that will come when the scheme is exhausted.
defaultWhilst the Discretionary Housing Payment is a ray of hope in a world of fear, these are only breathing space payments really. 
defaultPayment is patchy, and those claimants who are most articulate (or have articulate supporting services) have an unfair advantage over those whose circumstances may be more worthy, but aren’t articulate.
defaultFamilies with children are most likely to be hit by the benefit cap. The implications are severe where the cap removes all Housing Benefit pay
defaultment. It would have been better to have tapered the reduction in over a period of time. Claimants with debt installment plans now have to re-negotiate, credit that was affordable can be defaulted on overnight as income is cut. Whilst the principle of a ben
defaultefit cap, like the wage stop under supplementary benefit before, is laudable, the way it has come through has left claimants unprepared in the main.
defaultClaimants with disabilities are more likely to be affected by the under occupation penalty. Often housed in
default properties with a spare bedroom, it can be difficult to prove the need of an overnight carer as DLA changes to PIP with the planned 20% cut in caseload. ESA has already proved to throw out the proverbial baby with the bathwater, with claimants with severe
default limitations being told they are fit to work, just as much as those with only minor limitations. The uncertainty of income has taken “security” out of social welfare. 
defaultThis makes it difficult where there is an under occupation penalty, a reduced amount of b
defaultenefit but the extra costs of disablement not being paid.
defaultWhat could be helpful would be for the under occupation penalty to be waived whilst appeal to a first tier tribunal is taking place. This would provide an element of security 
defaultwhilst a claimant is on
default lower income than they believe they should be. If the appeal is lost, then the penalty re-applies. If the appeal is won, then the penalty is re-applied (or the shortfall recovered from the backdated benefit). 
defaultTemporary accommodation and supported accommo
defaultdation by its nature is dealing with vulnerable people at vulnerable points in life. Direct payments would not be an ideal way forward at those points in time. An exemption should be considered from the under occupation penalty and benefit cap given the na
defaultture of the housing and its often higher costs.
default&#xa0;
defaultMr Danny Hardie
defaultWelfare Benefits Adviser
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultTo this end, the Committee is particularly interested in hearing views on -
default&#xa0;
default24 July 2013
default&#xa0;
default