&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Professor Louise Archer defaulton behalf of the Targeted Initiative on Science and Mathematics Education (TISME) default(WSC006)defaultSummary
defaultThis submission outlines evidence from the Targeted Initiative on Science and Mathematics Education (TISME), a major current research programme that is funded by the Economic and Social Research Council 
defaultin partnership with
default the Institute of Physics, 
defaultthe 
defaultGat
defaultsby Charitable Foundation and 
defaultthe Association for Science Education
default. 
defaultDrawing 
defaulton 
defaultanalysis of
default 
defaultextensive, 
defaultlarge-scale surveys
default, 
defaultin-depth qualitative data
default and systematic literature reviews
default, our evidence shows that:
defaultOur recommendations call for the following:
defaultIntroduction
default1.1
default&#xa0; 
defaultThis submission is provided by Professor Louise Archer, 
defaulton behalf of the Targeted Initiative on Science and Mathematics Education (TISME)
default, with assistance from Prof. Jeremy Hodgen, Prof. Justin Dillon and 
defaultProf. M. Reiss
default.
default1.2
default&#xa0; 
defaultTISME is a major national research programme focusing on Science and Mathematics Education. It is funded by the UK Economic and Social Research Council in partnership with the Institute of Physics, the Gatsby Charitable Foundation and the A
defaultssociation for Science Education. It comprises five large research projects (based at the University of Cambridge, the 
defaultLondon 
defaultInstitute of Education, King’s College London (two projects) and the University of Leeds). TISME is coordinated by a team based at
default King’s College London
default, with Prof. Archer as the lead coordinator
default.
default 
defaultThis submission of evidence draws in particular on evidence from two of the 
defaultfive TISME 
defaultprojects: ASPIRES and UPMAP
default. It also draws on a recent TISME publication outlining our evidence for what influences participation in science and mathematics
default.
default1.3
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe ASPIRES (Children’s science aspirations and career choice: age 10-14) project is a five-year study. The study uses national survey data (from c. 20,000 students age 10-14) and extensive in-depth interviews with 170 students and parents to provide an authoritative picture of young people’s and families’ views of science and science careers. ASPIRES is based at King’s College London and is directed by Professor Louise Archer.
default1.4
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe UPMAP (
defaultUnderstanding Participation rates in post-16 Mathematics And Physics) 
defaultproject is a three year longitudinal study of the factors that cause school students to continue with mathematics or physics after the age of 16. It uses a UK-wide survey of year 8, year 10 and year 12 students with interviews of year 10, 11, 12 and first year undergraduate students. 
defaultc. 23,000 students completed one or more of the questionnaires, c. 100 students were interviewed in each of years 10, 11 and 12 and c. 
default50 undergraduates were interviewed. 
defaultUPMAP is
default based at Institute of Education, University of London and is directed by Professor Michael Reiss
default.
default 
default1.5
default&#xa0; 
defaultA programme of four research studies funded by the Nuffield Foundation and the Sutton trust on participation in post-16 mathematics, mathematically high-attaining countries and workplace mathematics. These studies collated and analysed evidence about different systems and reviewed the relevant literature. The studies were based at King’s College London and were directed by Professor Jeremy Hodgen
default.
default 
default1.6
default&#xa0; 
defaultOne of the foci of both the ASPIRES and UPMAP research projects was to understand the factors which dissuade girls and young women from continuing with STEM post-16 and/or considering careers in STEM.
default1.7
default&#xa0; 
defaultOur reason for submitting evidence to the Inquiry relates to our remit and responsibility to share relevant recent research evidence to help inform public and policy debate.
defaultEvidence
default2.1default&#xa0; 
defaultWomen’s under-representation in STEM careers is not due to a lack of interest in these subject areas at schooldefault. The ASPIRES surveys of over 9,000 10/11 year olds, 5,600+ 12/13 year olds and 4,600 13/14 year-olds show that the majority of young people like school science. E.g. over 70% report finding science lessons interesting and this interest continues from primary into early secondary school. ASPIRES surveys also show that a higher percentage of girls than boys rate science as their favourite subject – yet this interest is not translating into girls seeing science careers as potentially ‘for me’ . Many current and previous interventions aimed at encouraging greater participation in STEM have been based on the premise that increasing students’ interest will lead to an increase in post-16 participation. ASPIRES evidence suggests that this is not the case and that there is a disconnect between liking a subject and seeing a career in that field as conceivable and/or achievable.
default2.2default&#xa0; 
defaultGirls’ perceptions of STEM careers as ‘not for me’ are formed earlydefault: Evidence from 
defaultASPIRES
default surveys and interviews shows that despite liking science, few girls aged 10-14 aspire to STEM careers and that the proportion who do declines over the 10-14 age period. That is, by age 14, most girls have already come to see science careers as ‘interesting but not for me’.  Despite being more likely than boys to identify science as their favourite subject, only 
default18% of boys and 12% of girls aged 12
default-14
default aspire to a career in STEM. Girls are much more likely to aspire to the arts (e.g. ASPIRES surveys found that 64% of 12/13 year olds aspire to careers in the arts). This disparity between liking 
defaulta subject 
defaultand aspir
defaulting to a career in that field
default is not because students have particularly negative views of STEM careers
default:
default ASPIRES found that the majority of children rule out STEM career choices even though they like science, feel they are good at it, and think what scientists do is valuable and well-paid.  
default2.3default&#xa0; 
defaultNarrow views of where science at school may lead hinders STEM participationdefault: The majority of young people and parents who took part in the ASPIRES study report
defaulted
default narrow views on where they think science qualifications can lead. Most s
defaultaw
default science qualifications as leading only to careers as a ‘scientist, science teacher or doctor’. There is little general awareness among parents and children of the potential wider value and transferability of STEM qualifications in the labour market. The importance of this lack of awareness is reinforced by findings from the UPMAP study’s survey of 2,000 Year 10 students who were followed into Year 12. The survey found that perceived material gain (‘I think Physics will help me in the job I want to do in the future’) is one of most important factors predicting whether students will choose to study the subject post-16.
default In other words, if more young people, but particularly girls, were aware of how STEM subjects can be valuable/ beneficial for a wide range of careers both in and beyond STEM, we might expect to see higher post-16 participation rates in these subjects.
default2.4default&#xa0; 
default(Unwitting) sexism/default defaultdifferential expectations for girlsdefault: The ASPIRES evidence shows that f
defaultamilies constitute the greatest source of influence on 10-14 year olds’ aspirations.  Children from families that are familiar with the world of science and technology are much more likely than their peers to want to study science post-16 and/or work in science careers. Yet the UPMAP evidence shows that compared to boys, girls tend to receive substantially less encouragement from their families and significant others to consider and pursue STEM careers. This differential encouragement is particularly important given UPMAP’s finding that one of the most significant factors influencing post-16 participation in physics and mathematics is whether the individual had, over time, been specifically encouraged to continue with the subject by a significant adult. Wider research evidence also indicates that some teachers unwittingly hold and express differential expectations for male and female students. For example, Carlone’s (2004) US study shows how teachers in advanced physics classes interpreted girls’ (higher) attainment in the subject as due to their ‘plodding diligence’ but saw boys (lesser) attainment as simply laziness hiding their ‘natural brilliance’ for the subject. The lack of time and emphasis given to equality issues within contemporary UK initial teacher education also raise unwitting stereotyping as an issue for concern and attention.
default2.5default&#xa0; 
defaultGirls report lower self-confidence in their abilities – a factor which is exacerbated by the ‘brainy’ image of STEM:default 
defaultTISME research shows that those who are traditionally under-represented in post-16 physical sciences and mathematics (notably girls, working-class and certain minority ethnic pupils) tend to be less confident in their abilities and are less likely to identify themselves as being ‘good
default’ at science and/or mathematics,
default irrespective of their actual abilities and attainment
default . The
default UPMAP survey of 23,000 12-15 
defaultyear olds found that girls who want to study physics post-16 report lower confidence in their abilities than boys, despite tests revealing no difference in their actual conceptual abilities. 
defaultIssues of self-confidence are further exacerbated by the ‘brainy’ image of science. For instance, the ASPIRES surveys found that over 80% of Y6 and Y8 students see scientists as ‘brainy’ and those girls who did express science aspirations defined themselves (and were defined by their parent/s) as being ‘academic’ and ‘bright’/‘clever’. 
defaultMany middle attaining students enjoy mathematics and/or science but do not see post-16 participation as being possible for them. They see science careers as only for the ‘brainy’ few – a perception that needs to be challenged. 
defaultWider research underlines how notions of cleverness are gendered (classed and racialised), making it harder for girls
default, 
defaultworking class and 
defaultsome minority ethnic 
defaultyoung people to see themselves as authentically ‘clever’ (e.g. see Archer 2008; Archer &amp; Francis 2007).
default2.6default&#xa0; 
defaultThe perception of STEM careers as ‘masculine’ deters many young womendefault: The A
defaultSPIRES project found that 10-14 year-old girls find it harder than boys to reconcile aspirations for a career in science with their gender identity (seeing oneself as a ‘normal’ girl or boy)
default. This is 
defaultbecause most parents and young people associate science careers with masculinity (“its men – geeky men” as one mother 
defaultwe interviewed 
defaultput it).
default The ‘masculine’ image of STEM deters many young women and their families for several reasons, including the perception that it will be harder for women to progress within a male-dominated area and the feeling that STEM careers do not fit easily with ‘normal’ femininity (“its not girly, its not sexy, not glamorous” as another parent explained). ASPIRES found that feminine, ‘girly’ girls are less likely to express science aspirations than ‘non-girly’ girls and that the proportion of ‘feminine’ girls aspiring to science-related careers declines with age. In other words, the ‘masculine’ image of science makes it much harder for girls to maintain their science aspirations over time – they have to do much more identity ‘work’ than boys to reconcile and balance science aspirations and femininity and to sustain a view of STEM careers as possible and desirable.
default2.7default&#xa0; 
defaultSchool and family context influences girls’ subject choicesdefault: While powerful, the effects of social inequalities are not immutable. The context, values and practices of families and schools can greatly encourage more girls to study STEM subjects
default, o
defaultr not. For instance, it has long been established that single-sex schools are more successful in getting more girls to study A level physics – a recent report by the Institute of Physics shows that girls are two and a half times more likely to take A level Physics if they come from a girls’ school rather than a co-educational school. The ASPIRES study also found that girls from families who possess considerable ‘science capital’ (science-related qualifications, jobs, understanding and social contacts) were much more likely to aspire to science-related careers than girls from families with little science capital.
default2.8default&#xa0; 
defaultGender is not an isolated variabledefault: The ASPIRES research underlines how gender does not operate in isolation but interacts closely with other axes of inequality, such as social class and ethnicity. Middle-class girls and girls from White or South Asian backgrounds are much more likely to aspire to STEM careers. 
default2.9default&#xa0; 
defaultParticipation is influenced by a number of factorsdefault: High levels of participation are not simply driven by compulsion
default, or
default a mandatory requirement
default,
default to study STEM
default -
default particularly for advanced options. Other factors, such as providing appropriate options for 
defaultall
default students, the breadth of the post-16 curriculum in general, and the specification of mathematics (or STEM more general) as an entry requirement for HE, are also associated with high levels of participation.
defaultRecommendations
default3.1default&#xa0; 
defaultPromote the message that STEM qualifications ‘keep options open’default: All students need to be better informed about the transferable value of STEM qualifications for a wide range of careers. Promoting the message (through education and enrichment activities) that STEM qualifications can ‘keep options open’ and can lead to a range of well-paid and interesting careers
default, 
defaultat graduate and technical levels, both within and beyond STEM
default,
default would be highly beneficial. 
default3.2default&#xa0; 
defaultEarlier, better, targeted careers educationdefault: Most young people form their attitudes and their perceptions of STEM careers as ‘not for me’ between the ages of 10-14, a time when most receive little or no careers education to support or inform their ideas. Most families lack understanding about the potential value of STEM qualifications and STEM careers. 
default3.3default&#xa0; 
defaultEmbed STEM careers awareness in the curriculumdefault: A potentially useful approach that is used in other countries (and which a US randomised control trial
default has shown to raise student attainment and motivation, particularly among under-represented groups) is to embed information about how STEM is used in the world, and about the people who use it, throughout the curriculum.  This approach has the advantage of reaching a wide range of students – whereas current extra-curricula and optional approaches tend to only reach small numbers
default,
default and sometimes an uneven social or geographical spread
default,
default of students. However, teachers will need support and training if this approach is to be adopted – and appropriate policy levers will need to influence the national curriculum and assessment to enable and encourage uptake of this approach. 
default3.4default&#xa0; 
defaultBroaden post-16 routes (including STEM routes)default: The small range of options available to students after the age of 16 is an important limiting factor.  More options would mean more students would be likely to continue post-16, especially in mathematics where rates of participation are exceptionally low by international standards. The evidence from other systems, particularly Singapore, New Zealand and Scotland, is that encouraging breadth of study 
default(e.g. in a baccalaureate style system) 
defaultraises participation rates. Current moves in England to require students to study mathematics to 18 might be usefully applied to science. There is a strong case to be made for changing England’s current culture of early 
defaultspecialisation
default, 
defaultwhich is anomalous by international comparison. The lack of choices for continuing with mathematics and science post-16 (beyond traditional A levels in the separate sciences) for those achieving a grade B or C in GCSE is a missed opportunity. A mathematics AS-level equivalent
default,
default focused on statistics, modelling and the application of mathematics
default,
default could encourage the participation of students, particularly girls, 
defaultwho may 
defaultnot 
defaultbe 
defaultinterested in the traditional calculus-focused A-level.  A really useful alternative Science A level 
defaultthat is 
defaultsuitable for a wide range of post-18 routes might increase scientific literacy for all and further encourage women’s participation in STEM. 
default3.5default&#xa0; 
defaultChallenge the masculine image of STEMdefault 
defaultand STEM careersdefault: Improving the gender and social profile of STEM graduates and STEM professionals is important for both the STEM pipeline and social equity. There is likely to be a ‘trickle-down’ effect from changes in the profile of STEM professionals to student and family perceptions of the sector – but this result will, in likelihood, be slow to achieve.
default3.6default&#xa0; 
defaultChallenge the ‘brainy’ image of STEMdefault:
default 
defaultGiving more emphasis to non-degree and technical STEM pathways and careers would seem to be one practical route for educators, careers professionals and STEM enrichment providers to take. An 
defaultalternative post-16 
defaultSTEM A level would also be beneficial by enabling those who have not achieved A/A* to still continue to study science and mathematics post-16.
default3.7default&#xa0; 
defaultRecognise that gender does not operate in isolationdefault: 
defaultInitiatives aimed at reducing gender participation disparities need to be sensitive to the ways in which social class and ethnicity interact with gender.
default3.8default&#xa0; 
defaultProvide targeted support and encouragement for girls and teachers: defaultProviding sustained, targeted support and encouragement for girls, but particularly those from working-class and minority ethnic backgrounds, to see STEM careers as possible and desirable would be beneficial. This support needs to be coupled with meaningful professional development for
default science educators and teachers 
defaultto challenge unequal expectations among education professionals.
default3.9default&#xa0; 
defaultProvide professional development to help teachers, students and families to deconstruct gender (and other) stereotypesdefault. Existing wider research
default 
defaultindicates that
default teaching students and teachers to deconstruct (
defaultdiscuss, 
defaulttake apart, understand and challenge) stereotyping is more effective and long-lasting than simply providing positive images of scientists or STEM.
default3.10default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWork with familiesdefault to increase their ‘science capitadefaultl’default: Evidence suggests that promoting and encouraging organisations to work with families, not just individual students, with the aim of building science capital and to promote key STEM careers messages would help increase the likelihood of girls (and boys)
default coming to see STEM qualifications and careers as possible and desirable.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultFurther information can be found at: www.tisme-scienceandmaths.org
default Archer, L. &amp; Tomei, A. (2013) What influences participation in science and mathematics? Evidence from the Targeted Initiative for Science and Mathematics Education. London, King’s College London: 
defaulthttp://tisme-scienceandmaths.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/TISME-Participation-Report.pdf
default 
defaultwww.kcl.ac.uk/aspires
default 
defaulthttps://www.ioe.ac.uk/research/departments/cpat/4814.html
default 
defaulthttp://www.nuffieldfoundation.or
defaultg/; http://www.suttontrust.com
default 
defaultArcher, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B. and Wong. B. (2012) 
default“Balancing acts'': Elementary school girls' negotiations of femininity, achievement, and science.
default 
defaultScience Education
default, 96 (6), 967-989; 
defaultArcher. L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B. &amp; Wong, B.
default&#xa0;default(2013) defaultNot Girly, not sexy, not glamorous: Primary school girls' and parents' constructions of science aspirations.
default defaultPedagogy, Culture &amp; Society
default', REF
default; 
defaulthttp://tisme-scienceandmaths.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Gender-Differences-in-15-Year-Olds-Perceptions-of-Physics-Physics-Lessons-and-Physics-teachers.pdf
default;
default Archer, L., DeWitt, J., Osborne, J., Dillon, J., Willis, B. &amp; Wong, B. (2012).
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultScience Aspirations and family habitus: How families shape children’s engagement and identification with science.
default 
defaultAmerican Educational Research Journal,
default 49(5), 881-908; Archer, L. &amp; Tomei, A. (2013) What influences participation in science and mathematics? Evidence from the Targeted Initiative for Science and Mathematics Education. London, King’s College London: 
defaulthttp://tisme-scienceandmaths.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/TISME-Participation-Report.pdf
default 
defaultRose, R.A., Woolley, M.E., Orthnew, D.K., Akos, P.T., Jones-Sanpei, H.A. (2012) Increasing Teacher Use of Career-Relevant Instruction:A Randomized Control Trial of CareerStart,
defaultEducational Evaluation and policy Analysis, 
defaultvol. 34 
defaultno. 3 
default295-31.
default 
defaultDavies, B. (1989). The Discursive Production of the Male/Female Dualism in School Settings. 
defaultOxford Review of Education, 15
default(3), 229-241.
default; 
defaultSalisbury, J., &amp; Jackson, D. (1996). 
defaultChallenging Macho Values: Ways of Working with Adolescent Boys in Secondary Schools. 
defaultLondon: Falmer Press.
default&#xa0;
default