&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Sarah Goddard (WSC008)defaultThis is evidence submitted based on my personal experience of pursuing an academic career in medicine.
defaultI did an MRC sponsored intercalated BSc during my medical degree
default 
default(1993) and I had an MRC 
defaultsponsored PhD
default (2002), which I did at a fairly early stage in my training.  I
default wanted to continue with a career in academic hepatology, and got a lecturers post in gastroenterology.  In the end I gave it up and went into an NHS clinical training programme in clinical immunology.  I am now a part time consultant clinical immunologist
default and mother of 3.
defaultThe reasons that I changed from an academic medical career were:
defaultTo become 
defaultan academic in liver medicine I was required to fully train in gastroenterology (including to maintain the same level of expertise in endoscopy skills as a full ti
defaultme gastroenterology trainee) and general medicine, which takes 5 years, and then to specialise in hepatology required a further year.  This is a demanding training programme including on calls at weekends and nights, but I was expected to maintain in addit
defaultion a research programme, with supervision of a small research team and produce papers.  There are very few people who can do this on their own and in addition to being a successful mother I would argue it is almost impossible.
default 
defaultIt would have taken many yea
defaultrs including maternity leave and part-time working.  
default I could have given up medicine and changed to a purely scientific career, but it is hard to give up a guaranteed job and an interesting one
default, for an uncertain future in academia
default.
defaultThe only review or forma
defaultl 
defaultassessments
default that I had after my PhD when I went into the gastroenterology training programme, were RITA assessments run
default by general gastroenterologists.  They clearly thought that I was choosing an almost impossible path, they had no interest in my academ
defaultic course, but only in the numbers of endoscopies I had done, and the other boxes I was required to tick for becoming a gastro’ consultant.  I am not sure if there is a better process for giving a more balanced approach to assessment, but this would be the
default single most useful and achievable thing that would have helped me.  One of my consultants suggested that I should find a rich husband, which might have helped, but I fell for an architect and they earn less than one might expect!
defaultI really enjoyed my PhD a
defaultnd considered giving up medicine to do medical research full time.  However, this pathway is very competitive and there is no system to provide encouragement other than the support received by other mainly male supervisors, I cannot think of one woman in m
defaultedical research who I knew well enough to talk to.  The recent changes in university careers and emphasis on proving on-going publication success all adds to a competitive dog-eat-dog environment rather than a nurturing one.  To persist in an academic care
defaulter one needs a lot of self-belief.
defaultWhen I changed to clinical immunology I found that my research was suddenly valued and not seen as a problem.  It is a niche specialty with a high percentage of academics
default, my annual assessments were undertaken by clinicia
defaultns who had done a PhD
default.  I started a family in 2006 and a part time career in my current specialty works well.
default  I have been able to continue doing research, although not
default within an academic department.
defaultI sometimes feel that a lot of time and money was spent 
defaulton giving me a start with my academic career, which has not been continued.  However the work that I did with MRC funding was published even as an undergraduate and contributed to the department I was
default based with.  In addition I continue to use my research 
defaultskills in my current career, by doing small projects with support from local university departments eg genetics, by making better use of confere
defaultnce and journal information to treat my patients effectively, by teaching and taking part in college examination
default question setting
default.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default