&#xa0;
defaultDDB0002defaultBritish Chambers of Commerce – Written evidencedefaultSummary of the British Chambers of Commerce’s (BCC) position defaultThe BCC is an influential network of 53 Accredited Chambers across the UK, representing tens of thousands of businesses with millions of employees nationwide. 
defaultNo other business organisation has the geographic spread or multi-size, multi-sector membership that characterises the Chamber Network. Every Chamber sits at the heart of its local business community, providing representation, services, information and guidance to member businesses and the wider local business community.
defaultThe BCC supports the thrust of this Bill. The BCC welcomes measures to reduce unnecessary health and safety regulations on the self-employed working in low risk industries, and measures to ensure that regulators regard the impact of their actions on businesses’ growth. The BCC also welcomes the proposed changes to the employment tribunal system and the delivery of apprenticeships. 
defaultA duty to require non-economic regulators to have regard to the impact of their actions upon growthdefaultIt is important that regulators take account of the economic consequences of their decisions and therefore 
defaultthe proposed growth duty for regulators is welcomed by the BCC.defaultRegulation can result in economic benefits, and it is undeniable that some level of regulation is necessary. However regulation, and its enforcement, can also impose economic costs, with the most obvious example of this being the use of resources for regulatory compliance rather than the production of goods and services.
defaultMany small businesses do not have large compliance departments; this can lead to owners and managers spending large amounts of their time working through paperwork rather than on the production of goods and services. Equally, most small businesses use external support on an ad hoc basis to help with regulation, often at significant cost.
defaultThe BCC welcomes the Government’s aim to reduce the regulatory burden faced by businesses, and the volume of new regulations affecting businesses is decreasing. However, regulatory enforcement, rather than the regulations themselves, can sometimes be a barrier to growth for some businesses, particularly smaller firms.  
default&#xa0;
defaultRegulators do not consistently see businesses as entities they need to work with, and for some regulators supporting growth remains at best a secondary concern as it is not currently a statutory duty for them.  Consequently, unnecessary burdens on businesses persist and opportunities for regulators to support enterprise by working with businesses to drive up standards are being missed.
default&#xa0;
defaultChamber member businesses want to see lower compliance burdens, with fewer costly and resource-intensive processes, as well as co-operative, not punitive, enforcement of the rules in order to deliver a 
defaultbetter local business environment for all. 
defaultIf a statutory growth duty for non-economic regulators can help to achieve this, then it will be welcomed by the BCC.default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe exemption from health and safety law of those self-employed whose work activities pose no potential risk of harm to othersdefaultThe BCC has long argued that self-employed workers with low-risk businesses should be exempted from health and safety law. 
defaultThe BCC therefore welcomes this proposal, which will help to reduce unnecessary burdens that deter entrepreneurship.default 
defaultThe BCC supports reasonable health and safety regulation - the UK has a good record on health and safety and it is essential that this is maintained. There is no doubt that sensible rules are needed to prevent serious accidents. However, in recent years some disproportionate health and safety legislation has become increasingly burdensome to SMEs. This proposal is a sensible and balanced measure that will help to reduce unnecessary red tape on sole traders working in low-risk environments.
default defaultA lack of clarity surrounding regulations and their associated costs often leads to over-caution and over-compliance which imposes pointless costs on businesses, especially smaller firms that do not have a dedicated HR department. Therefore, the information function of the Health and Safety Executive is critical, the Government must ensure that despite cuts to its budget and restrictions on marketing spend, its business engagement and information activities are not diminished. This proposed change and any further amendments to health and safety legislation should be clearly marketed to businesses in order to avoid confusion as to which type of sole trader will be exempt once this change is implemented. 
defaultEmployment TribunalsdefaultEmployment issues often impact smaller businesses much more than their larger counterparts as they often don’t have specialist in-house resources, and the legal costs associated with a claim can run to thousands of pounds regardless of whether a claim is ultimately dismissed. Even looking beyond direct costs, businesses facing employment claims risk damage to reputation and to staff morale, as well as the opportunity costs of key managers or the business owner taking time out from the business to respond to the claim. 
defaultIn summary, this is a welcome change reversing a measure that extended tribunal jurisdiction beyond the time, information and expertise of the panel. We support the Government’s proposal.default&#xa0;
defaultApprenticeshipsdefaultThe BCC supports greater innovation in the delivery of apprenticeships with emphasis on the achievement of an industry standard.default This would replace the existing approach in which an apprenticeship is more of a process than a standard. We support a light-touch role for Government in assessing the quality of training organisations but would also like to see alternative structures for consumers – both the apprentices and the employers – to assess and provide feedback on individual providers.
defaultOrders defaultdisapplyingdefault legislation no longer of practical usedefaultThe BCC supports, in principle, the proposal to allow Parliament to remove outdated, uncontroversial and irrelevant legislation from the statute book. However, it is important that this measure includes safeguards that allow for some scrutiny of the removal of measures and that further clarity is given as to how this measure will work in practice. 
default15 August 2013
default&#xa0;
default