&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by default Dave Pearson, defaultStar Refrigeration (HOT02)defaultOur business has designed, manufactured and has delivered over 30MW of district heating and heatpumps in Europe. All of this avoid using HFCs as the working fluid.
defaultThe largest scheme is 14MW in Drammen in Norway. 
defaultwww.neatpumps.com
defaultPersonally I have contributed to several studies in London on district heatpumps. I believe we can deliver significant savings in carbon with 
defaultthis technique but we MUST stop viable projects being 
defaultcommandeered by carbon reduction solutions and thereby excluding zero carbon solutions like 
defaultheatpumps
default.
default&#xa0;
default• Is the government taking the right approach to reduce heat energy demand?
defaultI haven’t spent a gre
defaultat deal of time thinking about this aspect of the challenge but I do see and hear the first objective being “consumption 
defaultminimisation
default” and do see “initiatives” to achieve this and “conditions” on various support mechanisms to ensure that support  is only p
defaultrovided for a reasonable amount of heat. The carbon reduction commitment is on the agenda of our clients but in reality they are probably in a state of shock and 
defaultnot yet fully woken up to taking 
defaultsignificant and decisive action.
default• What progress is the gove
defaultrnment making on reducing the demand for heat?
defaultI really don’t know
default,
default which perhaps in its self suggests that at both a domestic and industrial level there is a lack of insight into energy consumption in either a kW sense of monetary sense. There are simple 
defaultto deploy techniques to monitor and display energy consumption that can be deployed for less than £500 per site. Apathy and ignorance and therefore bigger barriers than cost.
defaultMaybe though
default,
default business 
default&amp; 
defaultsociety needs a government agency to knock on their door
defaults and deploy a front of house tablet to display the meter readings. £10M would reach 20,000 businesses.
default The cost could be recouped over a few years.
defaultEvery business should have a display in a central area of energy usage last 12 months vs previous 12 months
default.
default&#xa0;
default• Biomass is deemed a key fuel for heat production from both the cost and GHG perspectives. What should be done to ensure methods of calculating biomass GHG balance represent an accurate picture?
defaultI fundamentally disagree with this statement
default. It is a my
defaultth perpetuated by those in the business of biomass 
defaultboilers, fuel sales or transport 
defaultbased on a lack of rigorous 
defaultinvestigation
default of the following factors:
defaultLikely world fuel cost rises for biomass
default – the cost risks render this a bad idea.
defaultImpact of imported bio
defaultmass on our macro-
defaulteconomic
default position.
default Energy independence has to be a guide on any technique stated as “key”.
default We should be reducing our energy imports not switching fuels.
defaultImpact of increased imports of equipment on economy vs locally manufactured solutions
default or existing systems.
defaultEffect of increased 
defaultlocal 
defaultemissions (biomass is NOT cleaner 
defaulta burn 
defaultthan gas). We have a national 
defaultsituation
default with air quality attributed to a life shortening of 7 months. Whilst this is likely in the main due to transportation does it m
defaultake sense support a combustion technique dirtier than that it displaces or requiring additional 
defaultroad / sea 
defaultfreight?
defaultTrue carbon footprint of harvest and transport operations for local and imported biomass.
defaultWhere I can accept biomass is on a rural community level however if I owned a forest I would be selling the fuel to the benefit of the local economy not puffing it up the smokestack. This is the fundamental difference to the Norwegian approach to fossil fu
defaultel vs the UK one.
defaultTherefore based on the above facts, 
defaultbiomass s
defaulthould not be viewed as 
defaulta
default 
defaultkey
default fuel
default.
default• There are sustainability guidelines for biomass, do these go far enough?
defaultAbsolutely not.
default They are neither inquisitive enough nor robust enough against misreporting.
default• What will the local environmental impact (for example air pollution) be from the use heat generation in urban areas, for example CHP units?
defaultCHP engines are also less clean than
default burning gas. Highly dependent on good quality maintenance and quality of fuel being consumed, and on operating set up where efficiency and cleanliness are mutually incompatible. A key aspect on the suitability of CHP is the utilisation of heat. In our exp
defaulterience, CHP engines are too quickly specified for demand that is too high. This is also incompatible with the “primary directive” of reduced consumption.
default A major oversight in many CHP assessments that also leads to 
defaultexcessive pollution is that the
default heat dem
defaultand is done in advance of any heat capture and re-use. Many facilities by virtue of the operation dynamics do require heating and cooling simultaneously. By using heatpumps to capture waste heat and deliver for consumption the demand falls again. Sadly how
defaultever as heat capture and re-use is not considered in advance of CHP specification the CHP heat demand is over stated resulting in either sub economic operation of the CHP unit, or sub-economic IN-operation of the CHP unit.
default A well designed building should h
defaultave no fuel combustion during late spring, autumn and summer as any air conditioning is a viable source for heating to 65C or thereabouts.
default• What are the relative merits of using gas to directly provide space heating compared to centralised electricity pr
defaultoduction plus domestic heat pumps? 
defaultThis is a very closed question implying these are the only two options. However taking these two options, gas for space heating results in a thermal conversion of around 85% less distribution losses in the gas network. T
defaulthe network exists and is simple to extend. Similarly, local domestic heatpumps can be added and depending on the quality of the installation can decentralize heat. 
defaultOther ideas though that need to be borne in mind are the emergence of domestic CHP and dome
defaultstic fuel cells. I personally expect a 
default“
defaultgas to electricity and heat
default”
default format to prevail in a domestic setting as whilst I am a heatpump supporter, unless the target is zero carbon heat then the use of 
defaultdomestic heatpumps seems challenging. Not least of all a
defaults I’m quite worried about the widespread dispersion of HFC heatpumps which invariable reach 
defaulta 
defaultpoint of gas leakage of the very high Global Warming gases they use. 
defaultLarger heatpumps use zero GWP fluids.
defaultOn a more networked scale district heating sourced with
default the low grade heat from the power plant (they are rarely more than 50% efficient so 1Gwe
default = 1GWth at circa 30C) is a viable source that can be delivered in a district network.
default&#xa0;
default• Why is community heating/CHP not more common in the UK?
defaultShort-termism of all 
defaultinvolved and lack of “big government” saying “just do it”.
defaultDigging in a bit deeper, it is the digging in i.e. the establishment of networks.
defaultWe need a mandatory “network ready
default” approach for all new building and construction
default 
defaultzones 
defaultwhich simply means hook up
default points and an operation temperature of &lt;80C.
default Think how much easier it would be to roll out micro netwo
defaultrks if the buildings were ready?
defaultWe need mandatory network provision on all soft digs. 
defaulti.e. new estates and office deve
defaultlopments, hospitals. 75% of the co
defaultst of heat networks is the digging and backfill so doing it when construction is underway. Whether subsidized or mandatory doesn’t matter. We need to stop allowing projects with no forward looking infrastructure.
defaultBeyond the “just do it?” mentality of Scand
defaultinavia which is probably the answer to “why aren’t networks Everywhere” more subtle factors like “anchor tenants” and collaboration between a couple of buildings comes into play.
default I am also skeptical about the ambition of the utility companies to deploy dis
defaulttict heatpumps which use 25% of the fuel of other techniques.
defaultMaybe a different approach is needed with the provision of an “ambient network”. Basically a pipe that users can buy heat from or sell heat to. It is uninsulated and probably single loop
default at 10C 
defaultto 20C.
default Individual buildings could deploy reversible
default heatpump
default units and thereby also remove the need for roof top mounted services and gas networks.
default• What are the lock-in, costs and GHG savings from the promotion of different forms of domestic heating so
defaultlution? 
defaultI don’t know what this means.
default Only heatpumps can be zero carbon.
default• Should the government take any further any specific actions in relation to cooling? 
defaultDistrict cooling might seem more prevalent in warmer countries but by successfully deploying
default “ambient thermal loops” cooling can be part of the heat equation. Without a doubt, burning fuel to heat stuff and burning electricity to cool it back down in an industrial context is poor.
default&#xa0;
default• Why does the RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully? 
defaultHeatpumps are the most complex of all the non-domestic solutions. Not only do they need the deployment of distribution networks (district heating) they require the acquisition networks as well whereas biomass or gas just need the existing roads, a port or 
defaultgas pipe. Most of the clients I have spoken to are in a mixture of ignorance or delusion that gas fired CHP is as wonderful as the sales guys say it is. Biomass is even more skewed with it being viewed as the best deal in town.
defaultA lack of understanding and 
defaulta lack of promotion. Star Refrigeration have deployed the world’s largest district heatpump using a natural working fluid and yet it doesn’t feature in the headline addresses or 10 o’ clock news. All we hear about is electricity generation, or maybe biomas
defaults. Even if we do 
defaulthear
default heatpumps we hear of domestic ones and the challenges they face.
defaultRHI would have supported heatpumps better if biomass was appropriately subsidized based on real carbon footprint and imported fuel content.
defaultWhilst I fully understand the
default limitations that DECC face in the classification of renewable sources, they must rectify the situation where a distillery waste heat at 50C is less valuable than a river at 5C.
defaultMaybe the energy efficiency directive will allow the incentivisation of reclai
defaultmed heat.
defaultTake a hospital as an example. It requires heating and cooling default default12 months of the year. The waste heat from the cooling can be boosted up to 60Cdefault for defaultspace or sanitary heating 12 months of the year dropping the summer time heat basedefault defaultload to zero. defaultInstead we see CHP engines deployed that depend on this 4-5 month summer usage to be viable- effectively killing the opportunity to harvest heat and consigning the facility to being a gas consumer forever.defaultA hospital could be zero carbon heating and coolindefaultg using heatpumps and renewable electricity. defaultThe scheme above would 
defaultnot 
defaultbe RHI so it is not attractive versus biomass or CHP.
defaultPersonally I would legislate against CHP unless it is for steam production or uses biogas.
default• How successful will the RHI be wh
defaulten rolled out to households?
defaultProbably quite successful as there is an army of PV guys who have the patter and the contacts list to deliver. Quality is the challenge and I worry about a legacy of leaking systems.
default• Thermal storage is a potential useful met
defaulthod of balancing electricity/energy demand both diurnally and annually. What is government policy doing to promote thermal storage, and should it do more/different?
default I’m not aware of any support. I don’t really understand it but thermal storage requires a 
defaultdifferential to charge the unit and this i
defaults quite 
defaulta penalty. I have seen evidence of seasonal storage 
defaultin Scandinavia 
defaultand this strikes me as a good idea, but it is far from necessary in this somewhat benign climate. It rarely drops so cold that heat can’
defaultt b
defaulte harv
defaultested from rivers or treated effluent plants and certainly not from data 
defaultcenters
default.
default The only reason for seasonal storage is efficiency and it wouldn’t make that much difference.
defaultOne application is the allowance of ground storage being RHI eligible. Thi
defaults is good.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default