&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Basf Plc (CCS01)defaultThe Committee invites responses addressing some or all of the following questions:
defaultBASF intends to respond to those listed in red given our expertise and interest
defaults. 
defaultBASF
default is the world’s leading chemical co
defaultmpany: The Chemical Company. Our
default portfolio ranges from chemicals, plastics, performance products and crop protection products to oil and gas. We combine economic suc
defaultcess with environmental protection and social responsibility. Through science and
default innovation, we enable our customers in nearly every industry to meet the current and future needs of society. Our products and solutions contribute to conserving resources, e
defaultnsuring nutrition and improving quality of life. We have summed up this contribution in our corporate purpose: We create chemistry for a sustainable future. BASF had sales of €72.1 billion in 2012 and more than 110,000 employees as of the end of the year. 
defaultBASF has been at the forefront of innovation in gas treatment for over 40 years. In 1971, the company for the first time applied newly developed technology based on activated methyldiethanolamine to remove carbon dioxide (CO2) from synthesis 
defaultgas to produce ammonia, a crucial starting material for fertilizer. The facility, which is still in operation, is located at the Ludwigshafen, Germany. 
defaultToday, almost 300 plants worldwide employ BASF’s knowhow to remove acid gases such as CO2 and hydrogen 
defaultsulphide (H2S) from various types of process gases. Recently, the company started marketing its combined gas treating technology, chemical and technical service offerings under the new Oase® brand. 
defaultWith climate change becoming an increasing concern global
defaultly, the team is actively leveraging its expertise to become a leading contender in the race to make carbon capture and storage (CCS) commercially viable. 
defaultMore information about BASF’s gas treatment solutions can be found here:
defaulthttp://www.intermediates.basf.com/chemicals/web/gas-treatment/en/
defaultBASF UK generated €3.6bn revenue in 2012 of which €1.9bn was oil, gas, and metals trading. Th
defaulte remaining €1.7bn accounts for 3% of BASF global chemical sales (€62bn), Our UK mark
defaultet share is around 3% of the £
default57
defaultbn 
defaultUK 
defaultChemicals sector. 
defaultThe bulk of our UK sales are chemicals and performance products (e.g. pigments, water treatments and care chemical
defaults). We are major providers 
defaultof product 
defaultto supply chains for 
defaultoil and gas, 
defaultagriculture, automotive, construction, and pharmaceuticals, as well as to other chemical manufacturers. 
defaultWe are major sponsor of innovation in the UK with over 100 R&amp;D partnerships in 
default2011. Within BASF this was the highest number outside Germany. These range from
default university projects with partners such as Imperial College, to institutional projects and
default commercial partnerships with BP and Shell.
defaultIf we were a UK-led business we would be on
defaulte of the top 100 companies in the UK. Several of our sites have over 80% of their product exported.
default We are one of @70 companies engaging with the Government’s Strategic Relationship Management Programme
defaultBASF are prov
defaultiders of chemistry solutions for carbon capture, we are not major providers o
defaultf storage solutions, but work in partnership with those that are
default,
default to deliver CCS 
defaultpilots and 
defaulttrials. 
defaultNiederaussemdefault – solvents for scrubbing defaultBASF
default is a partner in a pilot project st
defaulteered by RWE Power at 
defaultthe
default Coal Innovation 
defaultCentre
default in Niederaussem, Germany, near Cologne. The object is to test highly energy-efficient and oxygen-stable solvents for removing carbon dioxide from bituminous coal emissions. BASF has developed an improved scr
defaultubbing process
default, based on
default 
defaultinnovative 
defaultsolvents
default, 
defaultto capture CO
default2
default. We have
default demonstrated that energy input can be slashed by about 20%.
defaultThe pilot plant was built and engineered by Munich-based inte
defaultrnational gases group Linde. It 
defaultcaptures around eight tonnes per 
defaultday of CO
default2
default, equivalent to a separation efficiency of 90% for the flue gas processed. The technology should allow more than 90% of the process gas from a power plant to be captured for sequestration underground. 
defaultBoth BASF and Linde are now working on solut
defaultions for demonstration plants – the first are due on stream in 2015 – as well as large-scale power plants. CO
default2
default capture is expected to be used commercially
default in coal-fired power stations in
default 2020. 
defaultPuertollano – IGCC output purificationdefaultIn Spain
default a special BASF gas treatment technology
default 
default- similar to the purification of syngas - is being used at the IGCC (Integrated Gasification Combined Cycle) power plant of ELCOGAS in Puertollano
default. It
default 
defaultwill
default capture about 35,000 tons of gas annually. The plant
default,
default alrea
defaultdy in commercial-scale operation, is also being used for demonstration purposes. It is expected to provide a wealth of information relating to the viability of the IGCC concept, which differs from the post-combustion capture concept. 
defaultNorth Carolina – secodefaultnd generation ‘water-free’ capture technologydefaultIn the US BASF has joined forces with RTI International – a
defaultn institute 
defaultbas
defaulted in Research Triangle Park, 
defaultNorth Carolina – to develop second-generation capture technology. 
defaultWe
default 
defaultare looking
default into novel non-aqueous so
defaultlvent systems that can be recycled. The aim is to find a “water free” capture process that could use 40% less energy than conventional amine-based processes.
defaultWe hope to
default clear a path for rapid commercialisation of the carbon capture technology and thus enab
defaultle cost-competitive clean energy production from coal-fired power plants.
defaultNagaoka City – efficient COdefault2default recovery from natural gasdefaultIn Japan, BASF has linked up with local companies JGC and INPEX to perform demonstration tests with a new technology for effect
defaultively capturing and recovering CO
default2
default contained in natural gas. The tests were started in August 2010 at INPEX’s Koshijihara natural gas plant in Nagaoka City.
defaultJGC and BASF in began developing the High Pressure Acid Gas Capture Technology (HiPACT) in 2004. Th
defaultis process shows a “significantly higher” CO
default2
default absorption, compared with existing processes, and is capable of regenerating the solvent under high pressure conditions. An important milestone will be to transfer the new technology to an operating gas process
defaulting plant.
defaultHiPACT should help reduce overall power consumption in the facility while also lowering investment costs. 
defaultB
defaultecause the gas is released from the solvent at well above atmospheric pressure there is
default also 
default a significant reduction in the amount of ene
defaultrgy required 
defaultfor
default high pressure applications such as chemical synthesis or underground
default sequestration
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultW
defaulte would not be involved in
default pilot projects if we did not believe carbon capture technologies were likely to present significant commerci
defaultal opportunities in future. For example
default,
default 
defaultin 
defaultthe Middle East demand for purified CO2 is increasing, in particular to raise yields in crude oil production (by means of enhanced oil recovery) and in urea production.
defaultThere are and will be markets for Carbon Ca
defaultpture technologies even if Carbon Capture and Storage proves to be an unworkable or uneconomic choice for climate change mitigation. 
defaultCCS is still 
defaulta 
defaultvery expensive 
defaultand unproven 
defaultway to mitigate 
defaultCO
default2
default emissions from industrial processes and generation. It reduces efficiency and productivity compared to processes without CCS. It is some way from being cost competitive with the best alternative carbon reduction technologies. 
defaultAt the current time, without
default a 
defaultcomparable  
defaultglobal price for the carbon,
default the introduction of CCS
default within the UK or EU unilaterally,
default would lead
default to higher energy bills for domestic consumers and 
defaultcompetitive disadvantage
defaults
default for industry
default. This would be true for 
defaultboth 
defaultenergy-intensive industry
default (due to higher e
defaultlectricity prices) and for carbon-intensive
default industry
default 
default(
defaultthat would have to introduce
default their own CCS
default)
default.
defaultNevertheless, 
defaultif there were a global price for carbon
default,
default CCS
default might have advantages:
defaultPolicy measures 
defaultto 
defaultencourage
default CCS in 
defaultthe UK and EU
default should not seek to put a 
defaulthigh cost burden on 
defaultdomestic 
defaultc
defaultompanies 
defaultand consumers
default. 
defaultT
defaulthey
default should 
defaultfocus on 
defaultthe development and demonstration 
defaultof 
defaultfuture 
default(and lower cost) 
defaultCCS technology thro
defaultugh targeted fundin
defaultg, rather than
default deployment 
defaultsubsidies. 
defaultIf UK CCS demonstrations are generously subsidised, and UK industry is forced to pay for this through electricity market reform and / or inadequate energy intensive industry exemptions - one clear consequence is that manufacturing suppliers to CCS projects
default based in the UK will be less competitive than those not paying the subsidies outside the UK. 
defaultSupport for CCS, like other low carbon technologies carries a strong risk of creating a ‘green growth paradox’. Making a market but unmaking the domestic industr
defaulty required to service it. 
defaultPubli
defaultc finance 
defaultfor R&amp;D 
defaultis 
defaultthough 
defaultessential for CCS. 
defaultPrivate investors alone will not take on the risk of a technology that has no market without significant sustained government intervention to create one.  
defaultPublic subsidies are o
defaultnly acceptable for the pilot phase of new technologies and have to be reduced according to the cost reduction. Long
defaulter 
defaultterm 
defaultsubsidies which have to be paid
default by other market participants are not acceptable.
defaultS
defaultocial acceptance is 
defaultcrucial
default. The extensive developm
defaultent and operation of appropri
defaultate sites and
default a nationwide network of pipelines 
defaultwill require 
defaultdialogue with the public and NGOs.
default 
defaultA single
default legal 
defaultframework is also helpful
default. Regional
default variation
default - as in Germ
defaultany - has led to some states blocking pilots. 
defaultTechnology 
defaultnationalism will not help deliver CCS. It is unlikely any one country will have comparative a
defaultdvantage in every aspect of the 
defaultCCS value
default chain.  CCS
default expertise is global.  Our spread of projects in the EU, US and Asia we hope demonstrate
defaults
default the benefits 
defaultand spr
defaultead 
defaultof multilateral partnerships. 
default 
defaultWe, or rather our Wingas Storage subsidiary at Saltfleetby (currently in transition to Gazprom subject to a Commission competition ruling), have already found the UK market for storage solutions to be challenging. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAltogether, RWE is spending around €9 million on the 
defaultNiederaussem 
defaultdevelopment project. The German federal government contributed about €4 million to the cost of the pilot plant
default. 
defaultThe North Carolina project is being su
defaultpported in part by a $2 million grant from the US Department of Energy.  
defaultThe ambition of the current and previous Government to make the UK a global export champion for CCS technologies is bold
default. It
default has not happ
defaultened yet and
default might be more credible if 
defaultnarrowly focused on specific parts of the value chain with serious potential for comparative advantage
default. It might be more credible for the UK to focus on partnership rather than leadership
default within international teams.
default 
defaultWe recognise internationalism is a part of the UK approach, but 
default 
defaultpremised on an assumption collaboration will be delivered by companies that have succeeded in the UK first, based around the pilot projects that have been two years away from starting for muc
defaulth of the last decade.  
defaultWe do not 
defaultthen 
defaultbelieve the UK can or will be global leaders in 
defaultall
default CCS 
defaulttechnologies and suspect 
defaultthe desire to ‘build it here’, evident since the 
defaultabort
defaulted BP Peterhead project
default (2007)
default, has held back
default,
default not helped the commercialisation and export of ‘invented here’ technologies. 
defaultWe suspect
default further
default there has been less ‘invented here’ as a result of seeking UK-led projects rather than partnerships of the willing. 
defaultThese c
defaultould lower UK costs
default,
default while broadeni
defaultn
defaultg the pool of  expertise involved, and improving the prospects for future commercial success. 
defaultFor example, for the
default manufacture of BASF’s future CCS intermediates to take place in the UK, even those based on 
defaulthypothetical 
defaultUK science partnerships, there wou
defaultld have to be significant evidence of comparative advantage from the tax, planning and regulatory regime, local expertise, and appropriate sites. 
defaultWe would need to see evidence of an emerging CCS hub both domestic and for export, and multiple partners
default,
default to 
defaultspread risk and accelerate innovation. We would like
defaultly
default seek to invest in and partner with emerging SMEs or adapt existing plant rather than build from scratch. 
defaultAll of this would need 
defaultto be significantly and relatively more attractive than current opportunities in other countries - many of which are ahead of the UK in respect of CCS projects and pilots – many of which have established cost advantages for skills and supply in Intermediat
defaulte Chemicals. 
defaultWe do agree with the strong focus in the strategy placed on cost-reduction. We do agree with many of the 
defaultideas put forward by the report
default of the CCS Cost Reduction Task Force. We do again though think too much attention is being given to domes
defaulttic pilots and projects and not enough to selecting markets and partners with lower cost profiles than t
defaulthe UK. 
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default