&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence to the inquiry into Women in STEM careersWritten evidence to the inquiry into Women in STEM careersWritten evidence to the inquiry into Women in STEM careers
defaultWritten evidence defaultsubmitted by defaultthe defaultInstitute of Materialsdefault, Minerals and Mining default(IOM3) defaultWomen in Materials Steering Groupdefault (WSC010)defaultFemales make up 10% of the IOM3 membership but account for less than 3% of the Institute Fellows. 
defaultThe Women in Materials Steering
default Group was launched in May 2012 to
default raise the profile of women in IOM3, develop a network focussed on the needs and requirements of female members and have a dialogue with women members regarding mentoring, networking
default and
default educ
defaultation. The written evidence below is a summary of the responses to a an email sent out to all female Fellows in addition to recent attendees at the Inaugural 
defaultMeeting organise
defaultd
default by the Women in Materials Steering Group
default in April 2013
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is evident that positive changes have taken place in attitudes towards, and opportunities available, to women pursuing STEM careers. However prejudices remain and the ‘glass ceiling’ is perceived to still exist. Much of the problem still relates to the 
defaultstereotyping of females at a young age, the lack of encouragement to study STEM subjects and the subsequent experience of working as a female in a male dominated field. For those with families the main obstacles are the compromise that has to be made when 
defaulttwo individuals wish to pursue professional careers, the need for flexibility around childcare responsibilities and the cost of childcare. These could be addressed by the provision of affordable, conveniently placed childcare and flexible hour contracts. I
defaultn all cases there is a strong need for transparency within promotion procedures and encouragement 
defaultand support to enable
default females
default to
default climb the career ladder. The introduction of a mentoring scheme could help address this issue.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe general consensus is that high achieving women often get overlooked for promotion. An observation is that women are less outwardly ambitious and less good at self-p
defaultromotion than their male equivalents.  Often females will ‘’wait to be asked’’ as opposed to putting themselves forward in the belief that if they keep their heads down and do a 
defaultgood 
defaultjob, their ability will be noticed and promotion will follow. This can be
default interpreted wrongly as a lack of ambition or personal awareness of potential.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe evidence is that 
defaultvisibility
default within the workplace 
defaultcan 
defaultinfluence 
defaultwhether 
defaultone is 
defaultchosen for promotion
default. 
defaultOn this point, although technically the opportunities are equally open t
defaulto men and women, and there are some very good women in senior roles, there is still a critical mass of managers who sub-consciously recruit those like themselves, which results in a series of management clones.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIf the manager is male, and works in a parti
defaultcular way or style, he will tend to promote those with a similar style
default that he recognises
default, rather than accepting that it would be possible do the job equally well with a different style. There is also the feeling of exclusion from
default certain areas within the 
defaultworkplace, eg
default the friendships 
defaultbetween male colleagues 
defaultand the accompanying bonhomie which can inhibit promotion opportunities if the 
defaultfemale member of staff 
defaultis not seen as ‘’one of the boys’’.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWomen can be more focussed 
defaultthan men 
defaulton achieving a balance between their personal life and career and as a consequence 
defaultare 
defaultmore often in a position of compromising
default one or both
default. 
defaultThe further up the ladder one rises the more “out of hours” socialising/networking is required. Women are poor at t
defaulthis 
defaultand frequently have primary responsibility for children or elderly relatives - women prioritise these domestic responsibilities rather than networking
default&#xa0;
defaultIt needs to be recognised that it is extremely difficult for two professionals to develop their care
defaulters equit
defaultably (i.e husband and wife) as 
defaultboth cannot necessarily relocate to take on new jobs/promotions. As the role of the female can often be seen as that of the main carer in a family situation, the female 
defaultwill be the one to compromise on
default promotion oppo
defaultrtunities.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe culture that ‘’employing women was a complete 
defaultwaste of time, since they will 
defaultget married and leave just as they became useful’’ is still in evidence. This can be coupled with the male perception that ‘’all women behave in the same 
defaultway 
defaultas th
defaulte most air-headed female they know’’.
default&#xa0;defaultWomen are the child-bearers and parenthood can bring with it career limitations relating to the ability to travel abroad for work and less capacity to work long hours to meet impending
default deadlines, due to caring  commitments. Th
defaultis can compromise both work and
default family life. 
defaultIt is perceived that o
defaultne of the key features 
defaultan individual is
default judged 
defaulton for promotion is flexibility
default 
defaultand if they are tied to nursery/
defaultschool hours, they cannot be as flex
defaultible as a person without those external commitments.
default 
defaultIf there is more than one child, the choice to stay 
defaultat home is stacked even more in 
defaultfavour of not working due to the extremely high costs associated with child-care in the UK
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWomen can feel their career has stagnated since having children and can also feel 
defaultthat 
defaultbecoming a parent has put up 
defaultfurther barriers to promotion based on the demands of the next career steps, e.g. international recognition if travel has been restricted. T
defaulthis can be seen as impacting on visibility and ultimately career progression which in turn can lead to disillusionment.
default&#xa0;
default Many women find that it is difficult to become a ‘returner’ and the longer they are out of professional employment the more difficult it becomes to retu
defaultrn. Some 
defaultmay be the same age as their colleagues but they will not have the same level of experience. T
defaulthey do not have the same confidence as male counterparts and their honest
defaulty
default about their ability to return can be interpreted as a lack of confidence. For some women this situation is resolved by moving into other areas like HR
default where they perceive the demand
defaults to be less stressful
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWomen are seen as leaving academia for a number of
default defaultreasons and their destinations are variable. For those who go into industry, to quote one respondent’’ 
defaultThere are clearly beneficial consequences of scientifically trained women applying their 
defaultskills in a wide variety of different employment sectors. This generates wealth, growth and enhances skills in the broader UK e
defaultconomy. Although some graduates/
defaultPhDs will continue to be employed in technical roles using the technical skills directly, many wi
defaultll apply these skills to a broader business or public sector role which is also beneficial.’’
defaultAn observation is that some females with a technical background move into marketing to take adv
defaultantage of their creative skills. O
defaultthers start up thei
defaultr own business
defaultes or become self
defaultemployed con
defaultsultants offering specialist ex
defaultpertise 
defaultbut also giving them a more flexible approach to their working life.
defaultThe Committee is directed to the following sources where data on 
defaultPhD student
default destinations can be found 
defaulthttp://www.vitae.ac.uk/CMS/files/upload/Vitae-WDRD-by-subject-Jun-09.pdf
default. Another report also lists a wide range of relevant data sources
default(
defaulthttp://www.esrc.ac.uk/_images/career-choices-and-impact-on-graduates-report_tcm8-6388.pdf
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultUniversity careers offices often hold destination data for graduates that could be examined.  One respondent 
defaultdecided not to study for a PhD after completing 
defaultan 
defaultMEng citing one factor as the predom
defaultinance of male examples used within
default&#xa0;
defaulther 
defaultfirst
default 
defaultdegree
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultBoth parents undertaking joint responsibility for childcare is unusual. Traditionally it is still 
defaultthe husband 
defaultwho 
defaulttakes on the role of primary breadwinner and therefore the hours available 
defaultfor the woman to
default work need to fit arou
defaultnd the timetable of first the child and secondly the husband
default – even when nursery care is available. The logistics of childcare provision and working hours can be difficult to balance. In general, it was felt that finding a job that fitted around childcare 
defaultseriously restricted the hours available to work. As a consequence, women gradu
defaultates often take on the role of 
defaultteaching assistants, as the hours fit in with family life and school holidays. This can be seen as having a positive benefit in that this might be
default a way of influencing the next generation to at least embark on a STEM career.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt was felt that 
defaultthe 
defaultopportunity 
defaultexists for re
defaultintroducing
default,
default 
defaultto the workplace
default,
default 
defaultSTEM academics and graduates who are approaching the point where childcare responsibilities are
default diminishing. However many STEM graduates choose more local
defaultly available
default options 
defaultas they lack confidence to return to the STEM area in which they previously worked. This is an issue for those returning to work after maternity leave as well as those who have
default been taking a career break whilst bringing up a family.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe problem of retaining females in STEM subject areas is s
defaulteen as being related to 
defaultthe insecurity of short term contracts, the perception that future promotion opportunities would be biased against females and that they would not be treated fairly and as equals. The situation was seen as being further aggravated b
defaulty the ‘two-body’ problem – ie the difficulty of two partners in a relationship seeking professional jobs in a similar geographic location; often compromise
default is needed and this tends
default to be made by the female.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt was felt that g
defaultuidelines 
defaulton promotion
default opportunities 
defaultshould be transparent 
defaultand 
defaultvisible forcing
default organisations to promote based on ability, not visibility
default.
default Women need to be made aware of career paths that are open to them and universities should evaluate all criteria for career progression to en
defaultsure they reflect women’s strengths and experiences. This could be facilitated 
defaultb
defaulty introducing CPD programmes so that where certain skill sets are
default required
default, these are identified early and training or other experience 
defaultis 
defaultbuilt up as needed
default.
defaultOne respondent em
defaultphasised that STEM careers are much wider than academic careers alone and that the higher education sector has a responsibility to ensure that graduates and PhDs regardless of gender are employable and consider broader options than academic careers alone. 
defaultIt was felt that gender stereotyping could be broken down by students at all stages from school onwards being made aware of the range of employment opportunities available and that schools and universities ensure that where possible they make women availab
defaultle at careers events.
default&#xa0;defaultThe need 
defaultfor universities to promote fam
defaultily-friendly work practices t
defaulto both mal
defaulte and female staff 
defaultwas recognised in addition to 
defaultthe need to develop a 
defaultculture of flexible working. The latter would 
defaultallow both flexi-time and the ability to work from home combined with term only contracts which would allow both parents to balance family commitments and work more easily.
default&#xa0;
defaultAn overriding response was the plea for affordable childcare. There is little ince
defaultntive to return to work if your entire salary is used to meet childcare costs 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere was also a suggestion that Universities could target more mature females.  It was felt that Universities tend to always target the young, and leave behind a large market 
defaultof older 
defaultpeople that they could tap into
default by promoting mature students, introducing flexibility in terms of study options and distance learning. The need for ‘one to one care’ of potential 
defaultreturners 
defaultwas identified as was the need to tailor courses to suit 
defaultindustry and career prospects.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultOverall it was felt that this was a question to which it was difficult 
defaultto respond.
default&#xa0;
defaultOne suggestion was that there should be better careers advice from school and throughout subsequent employment.
default Based on the evidence that girls do better in STEM subjects when taught in single sex classes the possibility of single sex sixth forms was suggested. However as there appears to be more peer pressure against girls doing STEM subjects in mixed sex schools
default this may be too little too late.
defaultAt University level the
default provision of more funding for longer-term fellowships
default was seen as the way forward. It should be emphasised that these would need to be
default advertised widely to raise awareness among
default all women in academia, and be 
defaultopen to both 
defaultmale and female applicants 
defaultto prevent them being
default seen as a second-class option.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe overriding request was for d
defaultedicated childcare facilities at academic institutions
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default