&#xa0;
defaultTUC – Written evidencedefaultThe TUC’s response to the call for written evidence focuses on the following clauses which it opposes: 
default&#xa0;defaultClause 1: Health and Safety at work defaultThe Bill will, among other things, take those self-employed who pose no risk to others from the scope of the Health and Safety at Work Act.
defaultIt does this by restricting coverage of the Act to self-employed people who “conduct a relevant undertaking”. A relevant undertaking will be one where it is a “prescribed description”, or it affects, by the way it is conducted, other people by exposing them to risks to their health and safety. This does not cover the self employed person themselves. It is not known what the “prescribed descriptions” will be as this will be decided by the Secretary of State in regulations.
defaultThe proposal came about from the 
defaultLofstedt
default Review of Health and safety regulation published in November 2011, where he proposed “exempting from health and safety law those self-employed whose work activities pose no potential risk of harm to others”. In autumn 2012 the HSE conducted a consultation on the recommendation, putting forward various options, but not asking for a view on the principle. The preferred option, which is the 
defaultone
default proposed in the Draft Bill, had a majority of respondents opposed to it.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultThe TUC has campaigned against this proposal because it would create confusion and uncertainty in a sector which already has a much higher fatality, injury and ill-health rate. There is currently a fatality rate of 1.1 per 100,000 for the self-employed as against 0.4 per 100,000 for employees. It is also opposed by the health and safety professionals’ body, IOSH, who say, “This is a very short-sighted and misleading move, it won’t actually help anyone; it won’t support business; but it will cause general confusion.”
defaultAt present, if you are self-employed, you have a legal duty to ensure that you protect others from harm resulting from your work activity. This covers all self-employed people. It is straightforward and it works. There is no confusion and it means that everyone is very clear that no-one, even if they are self-employed, can take risks with others safety or health. 
defaultThe changes proposed in the Draft Bill are completely unnecessary as the only time the Health and Safety at Work Act can be used is in circumstances whereby the person does put another person at risk. If they injure another person through their work, regardless of what they may have believed beforehand, the Health and Safety at Work Act will apply. 
defaultNor is there any need to change the duty of a self-employed person not to injure 
defaultthemselves
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultNo self-employed person has ever been prosecuted or threatened with prosecution only for risking their own health, however the Health and Safety at Work Act means that the HSE has been able to give them guidance on how to protect their own 
defaultsafety. Cases where self-employed people have been prosecuted have been where they also risked the safety of others such as window-cleaners and 
defaultscaffolders
default.
defaultDespite this Draft Bill, every self-employed person is still going to have to do a risk assessment to see if their work poses a risk to others and if there is no risk there is no problem, just the same as now. That will not change. 
defaultWhat will change is the confusion and complacency that it will bring. Self-employed people will be unsure if they are covered, or presume that they are not especially if they are not on the proscribed list of occupations or sectors (presuming they know about it). Even many people that clearly do pose a danger will think that they now have nothing to worry about so will believe that there is no need for any safety precautions. 
defaultWorse still people who control the workplace where self-employed people work (often bogus-self-employed) will wrongly think that they do not have any duty of care to them. Self-employed people who employ others may interpret it as meaning that they are exempt from the law.
defaultGiven that the most dangerous industries all have a high proportion of self-employed people in them (agriculture, construction etc.) anything that confuses the situation is a recipe for disaster. 
defaultThe Bill states that the proposals are being done “for the reduction of burdens resulting from legislation for businesses or other organisations or for individuals”. In fact it does the opposite as it does not actually change the situation for those who genuinely do not pose a risk to others and only creates complete confusion for all the other self-employed.
defaultClause 2: Tribunal’s powers to make wider recommendations. defaultThe TUC opposes clause 2 of the draft Bill which would remove the power of Employment Tribunals to issue wider recommendations to employers found to have unlawfully discriminated. 
defaultPrior to the introduction
default defaultof this power in the Equality Act 2010, a Tribunal could only provide a remedy to successful claimants, but not recommend to an employer address the root causes of such discrimination. This meant that where the victim had left the workplace (as they do in 72 percent of cases)
default,
default the Tribunal was powerless to ask the employer to change policies, practices or a culture which would likely lead to further discrimination.
defaultThe government wants to repeal this provision because of “employer fears about inappropriate or excessive recommendations”.
default Yet there is no credible evidence to support this argument. 
defaultIn 2012 there were 19 cases where Tribunals issued wider recommendations according to a recent study published in Equality Opportunities Review (EOR).
default In 15 of those cases the 
defaultrecommendation was for training on equality and diversity. In seven cases, respondents were asked to address equality issues generally or to review policies. 
defaultSuch recommendations are made by a Tribunal judge and two lay members, including one representing business, after considering all evidence at a full hearing. As such, they are proportionate and reasonable suggestions to address serious cases of discrimination. For example: 
defaultRather than being “excessive”, such recommendations are widely regarded and promoted as good practice by business, government and a range of other organisations.
default They also have clear business benefits. BIS and the GEO published a comprehensive literature review of 112 academic and official studies into the business benefits of equality and diversity in January this year concluding that to secure such benefits requires “...appropriate policies and practices, including appropriate training for those who lead teams.”
defaultIn contrast, the repeal of the provision will have a negligible benefit for businesses. The net total benefits of repealing the provisions for private and voluntary sector employers are estimated to be between £0 and £10,000 according to the government.
defaultWithout such recommendations, many bad employers would fail to address the causes of discrimination. The government cites research that shows that 54 percent of employers the subject of a discrimination claim “make at least one change” to their practices following the 
defaultcase.
default However the TUC is deeply concerned about the 46 percent of employers who do nothing despite having a claim against them. As the cases above show employers who have been subject to a Tribunal recommendation had engaged in such poor practices that they were likely to continue breaching the Equality Act unless steps were taken. 
defaultThe government has also claimed that “because the recommendations are non-binding, we feel that these provisions are not having a significant impact on employer behaviour”.
default But it cannot credibly claim that this power is both irrelevant and excessive at the same time. If the government truly wanted to make the recommendations more effective it could make them binding on employers.  
defaultThe TUC believes that the government’s Impact Assessment (IA) of August 2012 is flawed for three key reasons.  
defaultFirstly, the full benefits of employers implementing recommendations have not been captured. The IA assumes that the only monetary benefit of recommendations is a slight reduction in Tribunal claims. However, there are broader benefits to the workplace and employment practices as extensively documented in the literature review cited above that the IA acknowledges, but does not quantify. 
defaultSecondly, the government has failed to adequately consider the equality impact of the repeal. It claims that the repeal will have “no significant impact on any of the protected characteristics”, largely because employers already “make changes following a finding of discrimination against them”.
default But even the IA states that this only happens in 54% of cases, and even then, it is not clear if such changes are as effective as those recommended by Tribunals.
defaultThirdly and 
defaultrelatedly
default, the IA is now badly out of date. It was conducted when Tribunals had only issued wider recommendations in four cases, leading the IA to conclude that there “was very little empirical evidence of the power’s usage and the positive impact that it may have had”.
default This was unsurprising given the newness of the provision, but even then the government failed to examine the equality impact of the recommendations in those cases. According to the EOR, there are now at least 28 cases which should be examined as part of any credible and improved impact assessment.  
default&#xa0;
defaultClauses 58 to 61: Exercise of regulatory functions: economic duty defaultThese clauses impose a new duty on some bodies that exercise certain regulatory functions to have regard, in the exercise of those functions, to the desirability of promoting economic growth.
defaultThe TUC believes that these clauses are not only unnecessary but also potentially damaging and in some cases likely to compromise the independence of some regulatory bodies, for example, the HSE and the EHRC, both of which are required under EU legislation to 
defaultoperate at arm’s length from Government in the exercise of some of their statutory functions.
defaultMuch of the wording in these clauses is opaque; clause 60 permits a Minister of the Crown to issue guidance as to the meaning of economic growth but on the face of the Bill there is no indication as to what the phrase means in practice. 
defaultOf course it is important that regulators do not set out to impede economic growth but providing a statutory duty obliging them to have regard to it in the exercise of their functions, with no clarity as to where and how this might operate is potentially going to interfere with their ability to perform their statutory duties.
defaultThere is no indication as to how this new duty would be enforced and who would judge whether or not fulfilling the new duty would conflict with an existing duty to perform a particular function. There is a danger that those who are regulated will attempt to use this new duty to override the actions of the regulator. A business, for example, could argue that requiring a particular process to be undertaken before conducting a particular activity would prevent them from making a profit and thus reduce their ability to grow. On the other hand, not conducting the process could lead to an accident or illness of an employee. Which of these competing duties would prevail and who would decide?
defaultThe Government has already introduced a similar measure for the Pensions Regulator. The Pensions Bill establishes a new objective for the Pensions Regulator to ‘minimise any adverse impact on the sustainable growth of an employer of its defined benefit regulatory regime’. This is hugely controversial because it seems likely that employers will be able to point to this law as a reason to reduce, for instance, deficit recovery contributions – which means defined benefit pension 
defaultschemes
default are more likely to close. A growth objective may impede the Regulator’s primary function of protecting pension scheme member benefits.
defaultThe Government should provide evidence either that the Hampton Principles are not being applied or that they do not work. We have not seen any evidence to this end produced by the Government in support of this proposal. 
defaultThe TUC urges the Government to drop these clauses and consider other non legislative ways of encouraging regulators to adopt a balanced approach to their statutory functions. There is no evidence that regulation is needed in order to achieve this: indeed the Coalition Parties, when in Opposition, ridiculed the previous Government for introducing the socio-economic duty in the Equality Act 2010 and have subsequently decided not to enact it. It is not clear why they now believe that legislation of this kind is necessary or will be effective in promoting economic growth. Furthermore it is potentially damaging as it may reduce safety and well being for employees and citizens.
default&#xa0;
default22 August 2013
default              
default3
default GEO (August 2012) Impact Assessment of removing the power to make wider recommendations page 1, at: 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/136234/ia-wider-recommendations.pdf
default 
default Equal Opportunities Review Issue 237, 24 May 2013. 
default See e.g. Equality and Human Rights Commission (2011) 
defaultEmployment Statutory Code of Practice
default chapter 18; CBI and TUC (2008), 
defaultTalent not Tok
defaultenism, the business benefits of
default 
defaultworkforce 
defaultdiversity
default at 
defaulthttp://www.equalityhumanrights.com/uploaded_files/talentnottokenism.pdf
default; and Employers Network for Equality and Inclusion (ENEI) generally at 
defaulthttp://www.enei.org.uk/pages/training-consultancy.html
default 
default BIS/GEO (January 2013), 
defaultThe Business Case for Equality and Diversity
default, page 28 
default GEO page 7 
default GEO page 5
default GEO page 1
default GEO page 15
default GEO page 12
default The EHRC is required to meet international standards of independence and effective functioning under the United Nations Paris Principles for National Human Rights Institutions which risks being compromised by these clauses. 
default