&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultthe Ethical Medicines Industry Group (EMIG) (RAD004)default1.0default              defaultIntroductiondefault1.1default              
defaultThe Ethical Medicines Industry Group (EMIG) welcomes this opportunity to 
defaultsubmit to the Science and Technology Committee inquiry into 
defaultResearch and Development Funding for Science and Te
defaultchnology in the UK
default. 
default1.2default              defaultEMIG is the research based biopharmaceutical trade association that represents the interests of over 200 companies and o
defaultrganisations based in the UK. Our members range from start-ups, whose prime focus is often research and development (R&amp;D), to highly developed businesses delivering essential products to patients and the NHS. They are commonly, but not exclusively, small t
defaulto medium-sized enterprise
defaults (SMEs). Less than 20% of our m
defaultembers are rep
defaultresented by other trade bodies.
default&#xa0;
default1.3default              defaultThe UK life sciences industry provides vital medicines to patients, is at the forefront of medical innovation and is a significant contributor to 
defaultthe UK economy.  SMEs constitute approximately 90% of the total number of biopharmaceutical companies and it is estimated that 80% of innovation is derived from these small companies. EMIG member companies employ approximately 20,000 people in the UK and h
defaultave a combined annual turnover of £4
default 
defaultb
defaultillio
defaultn.
default&#xa0;
default1.4default              defaultEMIG would be delighted to give oral evidence to the Select Committee if it would be valuable or if any of the points in this submission require further detail. 
default&#xa0;default2.0default              defaultNational Audit Office (NAO) reviewdefault ofdefault Research and Development funding for science and technology in the UKdefault&#xa0;default2.1default              
defaultThe National Audit Office’s (NAO) report highlights the significant spend of t
defaulthe UK pharmaceuticals sector
default on R&amp;D and 
defaultits contribution 
defaultas a ‘key driver to innovation in the UK’. 
defaultHo
defaultwever, EMIG shares the NAO’s concerns that the sector is heavily dependent upon two large pharmaceutical companies
default, 
defaultGlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca
default. It is imperative the life sciences industry is able to continue to grow and contribute to th
defaulte UK economy bu
defaultt to continue to do so by relying sp
defaultecifically 
defaulton 
defaultthese two major companies, is deemed, quite rightly, risky.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2.2default              
defaultIt is therefore vital that the UK fosters a regulatory, fiscal and commercial environment which enables a new generation of companies to become significant R&amp;D funders. SMEs in the sector 
defaultare particularly exposed to the current economic downturn and the un
defaultcertainty caused by the current domestic environment. However, SMEs are essential to the economy as when they launch new products, they grow organically and additionally outsource many of their service requirements, stimulating a hinterland of service comp
defaultanies that contribute to employment and the economy. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3default              
defaultAs SMEs
default typically lack the resources required to conduct all
default 
defaultthe necessary steps, from basic research to marketing, 
defaultthey
default tend to focus their R&amp;D in a
default well-defined and narrow field, for example specific indications or pharmaceutical formulations. They also, therefore, frequently out-license or sell their innovations to larger companies. Currently, approximately 25 per cent of the molecules in the develo
defaultpment portfolios of large pharmaceutical companies have been acquired from other comp
defaultanies, many of which are SMEs. 
defaultIt is therefore critical that specific measures to nourish and support these companies and their associates are recognised and implemented.
default&#xa0;
default2.4default              
default              
defaultEMIG welcomes the support for the sector 
defaultthrough measure
defaults contained in the Life Sciences Strategy and recent funding for initiatives including the Specialised Services Commissioning Innovation Fund and the 
defaultBiomedical Catalyst Fund
default. 
defaultThe Government has
default also made important strides in fostering a more positive tax environment for the life sciences industry in the UK. Over the last 24 months there have been some welcome changes, in particular, the reduction in business tax rates, the introduction of the Pa
defaulttent Box, R&amp;D above the line tax credits and the Seed Enterprise Investment Scheme (SEIS) and changes to Enterprise Management Incentives (EMI). However, we believe the following areas require further consideration: 
default&#xa0;
default2.5default              
defaultThe NAO’s report separates
default 
defaultspending by independent SMEs,
default those
default which are not part of a larger enterprise group, 
defaultfrom overall SME spend. EMIG is concerned that the 
defaultreport 
defaultappears to denigrate 
defaultthose SMEs who are R&amp;D investors but happen to 
defaultbe a UK affiliate of a larger global enterprise
default from those which are ‘
defaulthome grown
default’
default.
default&#xa0;
default If so, this
default risks devaluing the importance of attracting 
defaultinward investment
default. EMIG believes b
defaultoth 
defaultindependent
default and UK affiliate SME funders are important to the nation's econom
defaulty.
default&#xa0;
default3.1default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSuggestions for future Committee inquiriesdefault&#xa0;
default3.1default              
default              
defaultIn light of our comments above, EMIG suggests the following 
defaultfor future Committee inquiries on UK R&amp;D funding
default;
defaultLooking specifically at:
defaultLooking specifically at:
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default