&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by The University of Manchester (WSC014)default1. 
default              
defaultThe University of Manchester has nearly 40,000 students and more than 10,000 staff. The University is committed to creating an environment where diversity is celebrated and everyone is treated fairly regardless of gender, disability, ethnic origin, religio
defaultn or belief, sexual orientation, marital status, age or nationality.  
default2.
default              
default 
defaultWe are taking positive steps to achieve equality in the workplace and are committed to both meeting and exceeding our obligations under current legislation. As an academic instituti
defaulton we believe that women are vital to the world of academia, and therefore find it relevant to respond to this inquiry.
default3default.default              default default defaultWhy do you think the number of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the career ladder? default3.1
default              
default defaultWork-life Balance:default Whether we like it or not, 
defaultwomen often carry the majority of childcare responsibility within the family and 
defaultsometimes
default it
default 
defaultc
defaultan
default be difficult to maintain an
default academic career 
defaultwhilst
default raising 
defaulta family or having other significant
default caring duties/o
defaultbligations. Having 
defaultchildren
default etc, does inhibit opportunity to go abroad to conferences, etc, (activity which helps CV and promotion prospects), particularly if the academic female does not have other support around (at home).
default Further, hours are often long and there is a lack 
defaultof flexible/part time working opportunities giving the perception that there is not a healthy work life balance amongst academic 
defaultstaff.
default Where flexibility or part-time worki
defaultng does exist there is a perception
default 
defaultthat career
default progress
defaultion is more difficult,
default as qu
defaultantity is valued and quality alone is not enough.
default For those women who decide not to raise a family there are still issues which include structural issues, bias etc.
default3.2
default              
default defaultRecognition:default Women can 
defaultbe engaged in a disproportionate number of service 
defaultactivities t
defaulthat benefit the School, for example being an admissions/year tutor
default,
default and 
defaultas a result
default may not
default have the capacity to work on activities that would better serve 
defaultpromotion
default prospects
default.
default 
defaultThe achievements 
defaultof 
defaultwomen 
defaultcan be left 
defaultunrecognised because 
defaultin general, 
defaultwomen are often 
defaultless good at 
defaultmarket
defaulting
default themselves 
defaultthan men
default. 
defaultA recent study of research abstracts by Ohio State University demonstrates
default that both female and male students believe that papers written by women are of lower quality than papers written by men. 
defaultWomen therefore need to ‘outperform’ men to gain appropriate recognition.
default3.3
default              default defaultLack of Confidence:default W
defaultomen generally take longer 
defaultor are more cautious about applying
default for promo
defaulttion as they want to make sure they meet 
defaultevery criterion fully before submitting an 
defaultapplication.
default 
default 
default3.4
default default              defaultLack of Opportunities:default Recruitment processes can be 
defaultproblematic;
default especially the higher up the ladder one goes. For example, ‘search committees’ are often 
defaultdominated by men who only access
default their own networks (which usually are made up of other men) so potential female candidates do not get identified or approached early on in the recruitment process. 
defaultA bigger issue is that 
defaultmany senior academic roles do not
default even have search committees.
default3.5
default default              defaultCareer Breaks:default Any career breaks that do take place seem to affect career paths
default,
default and the working environment is not always sensitive or accommodating to individual circumstances. 
default3.6
default              default defaultLack of Role Models:default The number of female guest speakers and images of 
defaultwomen on display is minimal or non-existent which means there is a lack of visible role models.  Women are often not encouraged by peers to network and be at the fore-front of the School.
default Further, there is a 
defaultdistinct lack of successful female role models w
defaultith families which 
defaultcan create a
default perception that it is not possible for academics to combine a
default successful career 
defaultwith a family
default.
default3.7
default default              defaultUnconscious Biasdefault: As a result of unconscious bias often similar people to that of the recruiter
default(s)
default are employed which leads 
defaultto a culture where there is not a diverse range of people, often with white males dominating.  Many institutions are starting to deliver training on this but there can be a lack of take-up of this training by those who need it most.
default Unconscious bias also e
defaultxtends to matters including lack of invitations to speak at seminars or international conferences – such invitations are important to promotion. This is a common problem.
default3.8
default default              defaultLeadership Style:default 
defaultWomen 
defaultoften perceive that aggressive political skills are required at 
defaultthe top of the career ladder 
defaultor in positions of authority, 
defaultas they 
defaultmay 
defaultnot want to 
defaultadopt this 
defaultstyle of leadership
default.
default 
defaultNot 
defaultalways, but often the male dominated leadership style can be aggressive a
defaultnd riddled with unconscious bias.
default3.9
default default              defaultLack of Mentoring Opportunities:default defaultMentoring
default to early career researchers
default is often performed by senior academics on an informal basis. Senior academics are usually male, and either consciously or unconsciously t
defaulthey t
defaultend 
defaultto choose people similar to themselves (i
default.
defaulte. males) to mentor.
default3.10
default default              defaultLack of Career Structure:default 
defaultCareer progression, for example by publication, funding and collaborations are difficult if you have a career break (e.g. maternity leave) and it is important that institutions help women returning from maternity leave to get their research career back on 
defaulttrack. 
defaultMoreover, 
defaultthe structural problem
default whereby postdoctoral researchers
default 
defaultare required to complete 
defaulta series of fixed term positions before 
defaultstarting a permanent academic career track can dissuade women
default. Contracts that are offered to women are usually short t
defaulterm which means female academics have to move around Universities more often
default, which is not 
defaultideal, especially for those who wish to stay in one place so that they can raise children
default, or have commitments as family carers
default. Further, there is a perception that 
defaultthere is not a healthy work life balance amongst academic staff and 
defaultthat women are drawn to industry where 
defaultthe pay is much better
default.
default3.11
default              default defaultExamples of supporting STEM academic women at The University of Manchester:default3.12 
default              
defaultThe University of Manchester is commi
defaulttted to Athena SWAN Charter for Women in Science and its principles. The University has held a Bronze Award since 2008 and s
defaulto far, four awards are held by Schools. The other eleven STEMM Schools are currently working towards awards, with the support of the
default dedicated University’s Athena SWAN Coordinator and a commitment to making a long term cultural change which will benefit all staff.
default3.13 
default              
defaultP
defaultublicity 
defaultmaterials 
defaultdepict both men and women and
default,
default during Open Days for potential students
default,
default female staff speak at events, conduct interviews and show round candidates. 
default3.14 
default              
defaultFaculty-wide Academic Promotions Masterclass workshops are d
defaultelivered every year, 
defaultand are advertised with a positive action statement to encourage women to attend
default,
default 
defaultto 
defaultsuppor
defaultt staff in submitting promotion cases. Furthermore Schools offer CV clinics for individually tailored support. 
default3.15 
default              
defaultU
defaultnconscious bias training 
defaulthas been delivered 
defaultfor the benefit of those on recruitment/promotion panels, to raise awareness of this issue an
defaultd for them to consider their own biases during recruitment/promotion processes. This is being developed to be included in mandatory recruitment and selection training for all recruiters.
default3.16 
default              
defaultT
defaulthe University of Manchester 
defaulthas 
defaultstrong network groups for staf
defaultf and students, including a Peer Support Group for Women Returning from Maternity Leave, International Staff Network Group and Women in Science, Engineering and Technology (WiSET). The groups organise events throughout the year and the 
defaultU
defaultniversity allows me
defaultmbers up to eight hours per year to be dedicated to network group activities from their standard working hours. 
default3.17 
default              
defaultThe
default University of Manchester 
defaulthas
default a number of family-friendly policies including flexible working,
default career break and special leave. F
defaultamily-friendly support includes childcare initiatives to help reduce costs with a 
defaultsalary exchange scheme for paying for childcare, childcare vouchers and two on site nurseries. 
default3.18
default              
defaultOur Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences has established a Fellowship Ac
defaultademy that provides concentrated support for those people wanting to secure fellowships.
default4.default              default defaultWhen women leave academia, what careers do they transition into? default4.1 
defaultWomen often work in industry
default, the NHS
default or for a government agency after they le
defaultave academia.  Alternatively 
defaultwomen 
defaulttend to 
defaultdevelop careers in
default communications
default and human resources. 
default 
default5.default default              defaultWhat are the consequences of scientifically trained women applying their skills in different employment sectors?default5.1
default              
defaultLoss of highly trained and highly defaultskilled people:default 
defaultLo
defaultsing a high proportion of the bright and skilled population overall, often into jobs that do not take full advantage of 
defaulttheir 
defaultskills and training (there is strong evidence that women have pay that is on average much worse than men with eq
defaultuivalent qualifications)
default&#xa0;
defaultis bad for the UK economy.
default5.
default2
default default              defaultLoss ofdefault role models in academiadefault:default There is a
defaultlready a
default distinct lack of successful f
defaultemale role models (including those with families) 
defaultso 
defaultfemale 
defaultgraduates 
defaultperceive
default academia as somewhere not to have a successful career and a family. In addition graduates do not get the opportunity to talk to academics to see what it is like to pursue an academic career
default and with women moving into industry, the prevalence of advice fro
defaultm women would decrease further
default. It is often assumed that graduates have knowledge about career choices, but this is not always the case, 
defaultand
default 
defaultso
default career support is needed, including talks from female academics
default.
default5.
default3
default default              defaultIndustry will bedefault seen as the natural progrdefaultession for women (not academia)default: defaultIf students are not able to identify themselves with
default defaultstaff at the University 
defaultthey 
defaultwill choose
default to work elsewhere following their graduation. 
default defaultMany go into teaching or non-STE
defaultM
defaultM related careers.
default5.
default4
default default              defaultMale domination:default defaultStatistics show
default that academia is often crowded by
default senior
default male academics. Losing women to different employment sectors will only make 
defaultthis situation 
defaultworse and further
default will enhance the 
defaultstereotype that only men are suitable for academic positions in STEM
defaultM
default.
default5.
default5
default default              defaultLack of diversity defaultin higher education:default 
defaultDiversity is a business driver and there is real evidence around diverse teams leading to better 
defaultorganisational
default performance
default.
default 
default&#xa0;default5.
default6
default default              defaultDecrease in ideas and innovationdefault:
default 
defaultA diverse group of people is needed to progress 
defaultand deliver the best. It has been proven that people from similar backgrounds have similar thinking patterns and therefore
default fail to produce novel policies and ideas
default. Diversity is 
defaulta prime
default catalyst for new ideas and innovation and therefore the retention of w
defaultomen in academia is greatly needed.
default              default defaultTo retain women in academia, The University of Manchester offers the following:default5.
default7
default              defaultEquality and Diversity Training:  defaultAll 
defaultmembers of staff are required to complete an online equality and diversity training module. 
default This is 
defaultincluded as part of the induction for new members of staff. 
default5.
default8
default default              defaultUnconscious Bias Training: defaultUnconscious bias training has been
default delivered to those on recruitment/promotion panels, to raise awareness of this issue and for them to consider their own
default biases during recruitment/promotion processes. 
defaultThis is currently being developed to be included in
default the
default mandatory recruitment and selection training for all recruiters.
default5.
default9
default default              defaultResearch Time:  defaultAcademics returning from maternity leave are offered a 6 month period, in which they are relieved of teaching duties so that they can focus on their research work. 
default5.1
default0
default              default defaultGenerous Maternity Leavedefault/Supportdefault: defaultThe University 
defaultoffers a substantial maternity leave
default package which includes 6 months full pay, plus 3 months statutory pay.
default 
defaultWhilst on maternity leave the University offers 5 ‘keeping in touch’
default days, which are paid and
default 
defaultnot t
defaultaken out of the maternity leave period
default. 
default 
defaultThe University also has a staff network 
defaultgroup specifically for those returning to
default work after having a child
default for additional support. 
default&#xa0;
default6.default default              defaultWhat should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and defaultPhDdefault students in academic careers?default6.1
default              default defaultCareer Support:default Clear career advice should be available which is sensitive to diversity and gender and a clear career structure should be provided detailing what career paths they can take so that they can make an informed decision about their career choice. Improved inf
defaultormation and communication on internal jobs, and accessibility to positions is critical, to increase the chances of the graduate/PhD Student remaining at the institution.
default6.2
default default              defaultPI Support:default Principal Investigators should be better supported to understand and
default deliver mentoring &amp; career advice as this is often the person the graduates look to for support. It is important that PIs are involved with the Researcher Development Team so they are able to offer the graduates all the opportunities open to them. 
default6.3
default              default defaultNdefaultetworking:default Improve opportunities for networking so graduates/students have the chance to meet early career researchers/lecturers and hear their stories about how they made the transition from student to staff. Cross-faculty and multi-disciplinary events op
defaulten more doors across the University where they would be able to work based on their expertise in particular fields.  
default6.4
default default              defaultRole Models:default Showcase and celebrate successful female academics.  Ensure that conferences, seminars and events include female speaker
defaults wherever possible.
default6.5
default default              defaultCommunication:default Ensure staff and students are aware of the policies in place to help support women so concerns from students can be answered quickly or found out easily. Running events where women graduates can see/hear that it is 
defaultpossible to be a mother and an academic and highlighting the support available following maternity leave is important. 
default6.6
default default              defaultWork-life balance:default We need to look at the environment within higher education where the long hours culture still dominates.  If we 
defaultwant to encourage and retain women then we need to do more to support those who want to work part-time, flexibly or take a career break and for there to be opportunities for
default them to progress their career.
default We also need to stop the long-hours culture
default to show
default it 
defaultis possible to work successfully whil
defaultst
default retaining a work-life balance.
default6.7
default default              defaultThe University of Manchester supports females who wish to pursue an academic career in the following ways:   defaultThe University 
defaulth
defaultas forums and networks for graduates and stud
defaultents 
defaultto share their experiences with each other and staff. There are also
default formal mentoring schemes where students are linked with an experienced member of staff and schemes where students can assist their peers. Other examples of good practice we have to ensure
default that women progress into academic careers
default are listed below in 7
default. 
default7. default default              defaultHave you any example of good practice? defaultForums for graduates and students to share experiences defaultFor example at The University of Manchester we have:
default7.
default1
default default              defaultWomen in Science, Engineering defaultand Technology (WiSET):default&#xa0;
defaultA network for all female students, research and academic staff in the Faculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences.
default7.
default2
default              defaultWomen in Life Sciences:default A
default&#xa0;
defaultdeveloping network for all female academic and research staff, administrative staff an
defaultd students within Life Sciences at The University of Manchester.
default7.
default3
default              default defaultWomen in I.T.:default 
defaultA
default networking forum for women at all grades working in IT across the University.
default7.
default4
default              default defaultNetworking default: defaultFor example at The University of Manchester we have:
default7.
default5
default              defaultSchool PhD and defaultPDRA Forums:default Students &amp; Research Staff from different research groups in the School can meet regularly (usually once a quarter) to see what others are doing and share experiences. 
default7.
default6
default              defaultEPS Ambassadors: defaultPDRAs engage cross-faculty
default defaultwhich opens up opportunitie
defaults for research in different Schools
default7.
default7
default              defaultResearch Staff Association:default Open to researchers across the University (4 Faculties) to share experiences about life as a researcher and to discuss topics of interest (for example: fixed term contracts, open access pu
defaultblishing and extended access). Manchester RSA actively engages with Vitae’s UK Research Staff Association (UKRSA). The first RSA Manchester Mini Sandpit was organised in 2012 which was a compressed version of the interactive, multidisciplinary workshops us
defaulted by funding bodies to drive lateral thinking and radical approaches to research challenges.
defaultAll research forums work with the 
defaultResearcher Development Teamdefault at The University of Manchester and there are a number of funds available, such as the “School Resea
defaultrch Conferences Fund”, the “Researcher Led Initiatives Fund” and the “External Training Fund” to support local initiatives. A recent event (March 2013) funded by the Researcher Led Initiative, “
defaultLife after post doc: What can 
defaulthappen next?”,
default defaultwas organised by 
defaultthe
default defaultSchool of Physics and Astronomy Researcher Development Forum where researchers and fellows from the School heard stories from four speakers from academia, industry and the public sector to help researchers understand the different options open to them 
defaultafter their current positions finish.  
default7.
default8
default              defaultMentoring schemesdefaultFor example at The University of Manchester we have:
default 
default7.
default9
default default              defaultManchester Gold Mentoring Scheme: defaultStudents are matched on a one to one basis with an experienced member of staff (a mentor) and will be
default in contact with them over a nine month period. The programme aims to help students with career planning and decision making about their future options
default.
default7.1
default0
default default              defaultPeer Assisted Study Sessions (PASS): defaultA Student Learning Scheme
default defaultthat is ran by students and provid
defaultes a facilitated, group learning opportunity that uses the experiences of higher year students to support the learning of lower year peers
default.default7.11
default              
default 
defaultThe University of Manchester also provides a 
default‘Buddy System’default which links PhD students to a PDRA.  In some Schoo
defaultls PhD students and PDRAs in the same research group share an office to help facilitate this and allow for everyday interaction between staff and students.
default7.1
default2
default              default defaultCareer servicedefault 
defaultThe University of Manchester provides a career service to all students during 
defaulttheir studies and for two years after they graduate. In 2011 the careers service won the 'Times Higher Education Award for Outstanding Support for Early Career Researchers' for their dedicated academic career website for PhD and research staff. Recently (F
defaultebruary 2013) the 
defaultHead of Post Graduate Career Development offered advice to students about PhD applications and career prospects in academic field, at the 
defaultFaculty wide WiSET event, 
defaultIs an Academic Career for You
default.default 
default8default.default              default defaultWhat role should the Government have defaultin encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers?default8.1 
default              
defaultThe government must offer support and recognition for women who juggle academic commitments and family commitments. Better maternity leave support from funding bodies should be provided s
defaulto that all the support does not have to come through the University
default. W
defaultomen need see that they can have a career break, return to work and go on to further their career. 
default8.2 
default              
defaultIt would also greatly help if there was better support for 
defaultpartners
default in terms of l
defaulteave so that a couple can jointly care for their child, without the woman missing out on key progression points in her career.
default 
default8.3 
default              
defaultProgrammes such as Athena SWAN should be more heavily invested in by the Government as they make a considerable impact on the number of departments that work towards gender equality. 
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default