&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Celgene Corporation (RAD005)default&#xa0;default1.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultCelgene 
defaultis 
defaultdelighted to respond to the Science and Technology Committee’s consultation on the funding available for R&amp;
defaultD in science and technology in the UK. Although we are unable to respond to all aspects of the report produced by the National Audit Office into this issue, there are some specific comments in relation to R&amp;D in the life sciences sector that we would like 
defaultto be taken into consideration as the Committee progresses its investigation. 
default&#xa0;
default1.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultBy way of background, Celgene is a global biopharmaceutical company committed to improving the lives of patients worldwide. As a company, we seek to deliver truly innovative an
defaultd life-changing medicines for our patients. In the UK we have developed a number of products for the treatment of cancer and other severe, immune, inflammatory conditions. 
default&#xa0;
default1.3. There are four key issues discussed in this consultation response. These are:
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe competitiveness of R&amp;D in the UK
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe uptake of new medicines on the NHS
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe role of Academic Health Science Networks (AHSNs)
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe potential of the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency’s (MHRA) Early Access Scheme
default&#xa0;
default2. The competitiveness defaultof R&amp;D in the UKdefault&#xa0;defaultCelgene believes that the UK should aim to be a market leader in R&amp;defaultD across the full life-cycle required for developing a new medicine. This means increasing focus on post approval safety studies, as well as on the initial recruitment of patients to a new study and translational research. It may be that some incentivisatidefaulton is needed in this area. defaultCelgene would welcome greater consistency around the approval process and costs of conducting R&amp;D in the UK. The current discrepancy in the funding and data acquired to start a trial is creating too much uncertainty for companiedefaults in the UK. defaultWe would also support moves to enable organisations to recoup the non-refundable set up costs where clinical sites are unable to recruit sufficient patient numbers. default2.1 Pharmaceutical R&amp;D is an expensive business. A recent report by the UK 
defaultOffice of Health Economics (OHE) suggests that the mean or average cost of researching and developing a successful new medicine has significantly increased over the last decade and is now estimated at US$1,506million, at 2011 prices.
default According to the OHE, however, R&amp;D costs vary substantially by therapeutic area. The most recent analyses suggest that the most expensive therapeutic areas in terms of drug R&amp;D costs are neurology, respiratory and oncology.
default This is because drugs in these categories experience lower success rates and longer development times.
default              
defaultThey also represent some of the areas of greatest unmet need in medicine. This issue is exacerbated in the case of oncology by the UK’s ageing population, the associated increase in cancer incidence rates and by the poor outcomes in the UK relative to other EU countries. Research in these fields 
defaultis therefore of critical importance for the health and wellbeing of patients across the UK.
default&#xa0;
default2.2 
defaultThe pharmaceutical industry in the UK currently employs around 67,000 people directly – 25,000 of those in research and development. As the NAO outlined in their report, the majority of
default current research programmes in the UK are funded and carried out by the industry.
default&#xa0;
default2.3  Celgene is wholly supportive of the significant
default contribution the National Institute of Health Research’s (NIHR) biomedical research centres and units have made to the current environment for R&amp;D.  The new Coordinated System for gaining NHS Permission (CSP) has been effective in supporting high quality 
defaultclinical research studies in England. Celgene recognises the challenges of meeting the 30 day target for gaining permission for a new research project in partnership with the NIHR, 
defaultparticularly given the length of contract discussions which must be conclud
defaulted before the trial can start, 
defaultbut believes 
defaulta timely 
defaultreview
default process
default 
defaultis an important factor in maintaining a competitive environment for R&amp;D.
default In many EU countries the process is more streamlined and efficient, as those conducting research do not need to secure R&amp;D approval, as well as approval from the European Commission and the MHRA
default&#xa0;
default2.4  Celgene has a number of UK clinical trials which have 
defaultbenefited from the support of the NIHR to recruit patients. In the majority of cases, their proactive approach to ensuring recruitment targets are met has been highly effective. 
defaultAt
default one of 
defaultthe
default sites
default Celgene works with
default, 
defaultthe 
defaultChief Investigator has worked clos
defaultely with NIHR nurses to ensure a sufficient number of patients are involved in the trial. The
defaultir contribution to 
defaultsecuring 
defaultpatient consent 
defaulthas been 
defaultvital in ensuring
default sufficient
default recruitment in
defaultto the trial 
defaultwhich
default may not have otherwise 
defaultbeen achieved. The 
defaultlearni
defaultngs from
default examples like
default this 
defaultare critical to feed
defaultback into the system
default and a more consistent mechanism needs to be put in place to allow all those involved in clinical research to share their experiences – both positive and negative.
default&#xa0;
default2.5  Despite the vital 
defaultwork of the NIHR, the system for approval for new clinical trials in the UK remains highly complex. Currently, approval must be gained from 
defaulteach 
defaultsite where the research is to be undertaken and each local R&amp;D office needs to be informed. There is no standar
defaultd form between sites and the requirements vary for each. 
default&#xa0;
default2.6
default              
defaultFor a multi-site research project, this can be challenging and burdensome
default, often slowing down the trial set up as a result. Other countries including 
defaultFrance, Germany, Italy, Canada, Spain, 
defaultRussia, Ukraine, Bulgaria and Romania all have less burdensome processes for gaining approval for new clinical studies
default and a standardi
defaults
defaulted process is therefore needed in the UK to make it more competitive on the global stage. 
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.7
default  Celgene has real concer
defaultns that the cost of conducting clinical trials in the UK is prohibitive for many organisations
default.
default The fees charged by R&amp;D departments are not currently standardised and vary considerably
default. In one of the studies Celgene has been involved in the per patient cos
defaultt varied from £5,500.00 per patient to £9,900.00 per patient
default. Despite the national costing template created by NIHR, this can make it difficult to plan for the costs of a major clinical trial programme and 
defaultsome centres are so costly it is impossible for a 
defaultcompany like Celgene, which is a relatively new entrant to the UK market, to justify the expense
default when other countries across Europe and beyond 
defaultcan be significantly cheaper than sites 
defaultin
default the UK.
default&#xa0;
default2.
default8
default defaultAdditionally
default, set up costs - 
defaultwhich are non-refundable 
default- 
defaultcan run into thousands of pounds. Whilst this is not an issue if the site delivers its quota of patients, this does 
defaultrepresent
default an increasing cost burden when they don’t. Celgene believes that R&amp;D fees should be standardised between sites in the UK and must 
defaultbe made more transparent. The fees should be proportionate to the size and complexity of research projects and there should be a mechanism in place to recoup charges paid if a site fails to deliver the required quota of patients.
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.9
default  The UK is currently focused on becoming a world leader in translational research and stratified medicines. Various partnerships and programmes have been set up to incentivise this work. 
defaultT
defaulthis is clearly an important and exciting area of research, which ha
defaults the potential to c
defaultonfer huge benefits to patients. However,
default 
defaultit
default should not be pursued to the detriment of post-approval safety studies
default which are carried out at the 
defaultreq
defaultuest of approving authorities and are often a
default condition of approval
default. It is vital that th
defaulte research community continues to understand how new treatments work in real world settings and are able to understand the impact a treatment has on patients once it has gained approval. 
defaultWe therefore welcome the development of the Systemic 
defaultAnti-Cancer Ther
defaultapy 
default(SACT) data
defaultbase 
defaultwhich will provide important information about the
default clinical management in cancer chemotherapy
default 
defaultand 
defaultwould encourage Government 
defaultto speed up other da
defaultta sets becoming mandatory so they
default can really add value quicker to the countries knowledge and insights
default. 
defaultIn line with the Government’s intention to measure the overall ‘value’ of a medicine, this kind of 
defaultinformation
default 
defaultcan support us to understand the patient benefits of a new medicine and th
defaulte impact it has on their quality of life. 
defaultIt can also 
defaulthelp industry to make its case for funding for a new medicine, provide collateral to clinicians wishing to prescribe a new treatment and allow patients to understand the full benefits of the medicine th
defaultey are taking.
default&#xa0;default3. Uptake of new medicines on the NHS needs to be incentiviseddefault&#xa0;defaultCelgene would welcome greater clarity from the Department of Health on the speed and extent of take-up of new medicines once they have received approval. In particular, it is vdefaultital that,default defaultonce a new medicine is included in a local formularydefault or nationally commissioneddefault, clinicians are encouraged to prescribe this treatment to patients where appropriate.default&#xa0;default3.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultOnce a medicine has been approved for use in the UK, companies continue to 
defaultstruggle to have these placed on local formularies
default or built into national guidelines and pathways. As a result of this,
default patients report delays in their ability to access the new medicines they need.
default This is often caused by long delays in the NICE appraisal
default process 
defaultand 
defaultit is important that 
defaultbarriers to prescribing 
defaultare not
default put in the way whilst decisions 
defaultby NICE 
defaultare 
defaultbeing 
defaultmade
default. To improve patients access it is vital that the NHS embrace
default new technology whilst it awaits a 
defaultformal appraisal 
defaultdecision or 
defaultthat NICE s
defaultpeed up their appraisal process 
defaultso patients don’t face 
defaultthese 
defaultdelays
default. The introduction of value-based pricing (V
defaultBP
default)
default 
defaultshould also not be allowed to cause
default greater delays
default in the appraisal process
default.
default&#xa0;default3.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAlthough positive steps have been made to overcome this challen
defaultge, including the introduction of the NICE Compliance Regime, progress remains slow. The Government must do more to ensure that the new structures across the NHS incentivise speedier access to medicines. The current status quo is both bad for patients – wh
defaulto are forced to wait to receive new treatments – and bad for the life sciences industry, which invests heavily in the development of new medicines that do not get the take-up anticipated, despite support from clinicians and patients.
default It is also important t
defaulto minimise the current 
defaultvariation in uptake and 
defaultNHS E
defaultngland 
defaultmust 
defaultlook at best practice 
defaultacross the country in order to
default ensure variation is minimized to best standards to ensure equality across UK.
default&#xa0;default4. The role of Academic Health Science Networks (AHSNs)default&#xa0;defaultCelgene believes the Government should do more to incentivise industry involvement in AHSNs and would welcome AHSNs playing a more active role in creating simpler, more consistent approval processes for new clinical trialsdefault.default4.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere is a huge amount of 
defaultoverlap between the work of industry and the academic research community
default. U
defaultltimately
default,
default both are looking to achieve the same outcomes – access to the best, new treatments for patients in the UK at the appropriate point in the patient journey.
default&#xa0;default4.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultGood science a
defaultnd good investment is equally important to both parties. It is easier to harness funding and access the best data when organisations from industry and academia work together. More needs to be done to promote and incentivise partnership working where this w
defaultill lead to improvements for patients. AHSNs are a welcome step in the right direction. However, their interaction with industry has been mixed – whilst some see collaboration with industry as core to what they do, others have failed to engage at all. It w
defaultould be useful for the Department of Health and the Department of Business, Innovation and Skills to indicate that collaboration through these networks is important to their success and share examples of best practice in cross-sector partnerships.
default&#xa0;
default4.3
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAn impo
defaultrtant change that could be achieved fairly easily would be to create super-networks in which three or four AHSNs come together to create a single 
defaultR&amp;D/ i
defaultnstitutional 
defaultapproval process for new clinical trials. This would simplify and streamline the process in
defaultvolved in setting up new R&amp;D projects and provide a greater pool of patients to recruit to the trials. This cross-AHSN collaboration is already taking place in some parts of the country and more should be done to make the individual networks accountable fo
defaultr ensuring the competitiveness of the UK as an environment for R&amp;D.
default&#xa0;default5. The potential of the MHRA’s Early Access Schemedefault&#xa0;defaultCelgene urges the Government to provide greater clarity on the direction of travel of the MHRA’s Early Access Scheme.default 
defaultWe also advocatedefault that the MHRA looks closely at areas where initiatives similar to the Early Access Scheme have been implemented. In particular, learnings should be taken from the ATU de cohort and the Centre for Accelerating Medical Innovations to inform and shape the Eadefaultrly Access Scheme in the UK.default5.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultCelgene 
defaultin principle 
defaultsupports the MHRA’s proposed early access scheme, which will help ensure that patients can have access to medicines earlier in the product lifecycle, including – assuming that adequate safety data is availa
defaultble – during the late development and regulatory phases, prior to marketing authorisation. This is particularly important for products that have the potential to deliver particular benefits to patients – either because they are to be licensed for particula
defaultrly rare conditions, such as rarer forms of cancer, or for conditions where there is high unmet medical need or few alternative treatment options for patients. 
default&#xa0;
default5.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThis scheme can, in particular, support the 
defaultall those involved in clinical research
default 
default(and those
default that are potential beneficiaries of the clinical research) 
defaultto collect high quality real life data which can provide significant insight into the effectiveness of a new medicine. It will support more widespread use of innovative new treatments that can del
defaultiver positive outcomes for patients for whom there are currently very few treatment opportunities available. 
default&#xa0;
default5.3
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHowever, greater clarity is urgently needed as to how this scheme will work in practice – in particular, what will the process be for selecting s
defaultuitable products and reviewing the available data; how will the MHRA engage other stakeholders (including industry and patients) in the process; and what monitoring and evaluation mechanisms will be put in place to ensure that the scheme meets its desired 
defaultobjective of improving early access to new medicines? 
default&#xa0;
default5.4
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe MHRA should look at other schemes that are in place or in development abroad to improve the early access scheme proposed in the UK. As you may be aware, a
default defaultnumber of EU Member States have put in place national arrangements similar to the early access scheme with the intention to increase availability to promising new products for a cohort of patients where there is unmet need. The most well-known of these is 
defaultthe 
defaultAutorisations Temporaires d’Utilisation de cohorte 
default(ATU de cohorte), which was introduced in France in 1994 and where more than 130 medicines were granted an ATU de cohorte in therapeutic areas, including oncology-haematology, CNS, infectious diseases and metabolism (including rare diseases). Feedback sugg
defaultests that the positive impact of this national scheme has been attributable to the fact that these products are subject to reimbursement. Although this has not been an unbridled success, it does provide an opportunity for the MHRA to learn the lessons from
default elsewhere as they design their own scheme. 
default&#xa0;
default5.5
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe development of innovative medicines is a highly regulated, lengthy and expensive undertaking and the continued research and development of novel products to treat areas of unmet medical need should be incen
defaulttivised by appropriate reimbursement policies. If a similar scheme 
defaultto the ATU de cohort 
defaultwere to be introduced in the UK, an appropriate level of reimbursement should be considered to incentivise innovation by the research community and companies.
default&#xa0;
default5.6
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere is
default also much to be supported in the proposals for adaptive licensing, being developed by the Centre for Accelerating Medical Innovations at Oxford University. Over the past five years a number of schemes have been put forward that take a more adaptive approa
defaultch to market access
default, such as
default ‘staggered approval’, ‘conditional licensing’ and ‘progressive approval’. The central elements of all these new systems and the important factor that should be incorporated into the early access scheme is not the design but the
default collaboration between academia, manufacturers, 
defaulthealthcare professionals, the regulators, patient groups and – increasingly – reimbursement agencies
default. 
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Mestre-Ferrandiz, J., Sussex, J. and Towse, A. The R &amp; D Cost of a New Medicine. Office of Health Economics. 2012. Executive Summary. p. v.
default Mestre-Ferrandiz, J., Sussex, J. and Towse, A. Op.cit. p. vi.
default National Audit Office. Research and Development funding for science and technology in the UK, Memorandum for the House of Commons Science and Technology Committee, 2013. P.vii 
default&#xa0;
default