&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultCRB 42default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by Federation Against Software Theft  (FAST)default&#xa0;defaultThe Federation Against Software Theft (FAST) is a not-for-profit organisation 
defaultestablished in 1984 
defaultwhich represents software publishers in protecting their intellectual 
defaultproperty rights.
default It
defaults web site with further information may be found at 
defaulthttp://www.fastiis.org/
default 
defaultIn general FAST welcomes the provisions of the Consumer Rights Bill and in particular the clarification of the law which
default will 
defaultresult
default from the introduction of a new concept of “digital content”.
defaultHowever, we are concerned about some elements of Chapter 3
default of Part I (“Digital Content”) and one element of the new enforcement regime in Schedule 5
default.
defaultA. defaultDigital Contentdefault1. Proposed ndefaultew idefaultmplied termsdefaultOur f
defaultirst
default area of concern relates to
default 
defaultthe
default 
defaultimplied terms as to 
default“satisfactory quality” in proposed section
default 36
default, fitness for purpose in proposed section 37 and 
defaultcorrespondence to description
default in proposed section 38. Plainly 
defaultbreach of any of these
default requirements gives rise to a right to repair or replacement, the right to a price reduction and a potential right to the full panoply of measures referred to in proposed section 44(5). In addition, and very significantly, 
defaultthe effect of section 49 is that 
defaultliability under these provisions cannot be excluded or restricted
default (this is dealt with further below)
default.
defaultAs the 
defaultImpact A
defaultssessment makes clear, 
defaultsoftware is special
default: 
default“Bugs are considered standard in digital content on issue.”
default 
defaultAs Prof Bradgate 
defaultsaid
default in his report for BIS: 
default“Even with extensive testing, it is quite common, and an experienced computer user will be aware of the fact, that the complexity of modern programs is such that bugs in the program are likely to manifest themselves throughout the p
defaultrogram's lifetime. Modern complex programs therefore need regular updating and patching to correct bugs and/or other potential weaknesses in the program as they arise.”
default 
defaultProf Bradgate 
defaultalso states:
default “the courts have shown themselves aware of the fact that n
defaultew software cannot be guaranteed free from "bugs" and the presence of bugs, especially in new software, does 
defaultnot necessarily make it unsatisfactory
default because 
defaultbugs are considered standard in digital content on issue.
default”
default 
defaultIt follows that in general the presence
default of bugs
default in software
default is not in itself regarded as a breach of contrac
defaultt. We
default understand from the Impact Assessment that it is not the Government’s intention to change the law in this regard.
default The difficulty with the new 
defaultimplied terms
default as drafted is that they 
defaultdo not appear to cater explicitly for the presence of bugs. There is a real danger that an ordinary reader of these provisions (and it is evident from the 
defaultuser-friendly form
default of the drafting that the Act is 
defaultin part at least
default directed at the ordinary reader) 
defaultmay well be led to conclude that digital content containing bugs is not of satisfactory quality, is not fit for purpose and is not as described. 
defaultThis is apparent from the following:
defaultProposed section 36 (satisfactory quality).
default 
defaultOne
default of the i
defaultndicia of satisfa
defaultctory quality 
defaultis freedom from minor defects. The test is what a “reasonable person” would
default consider satisfactory and 
defaultall relevant circumstances are to be considered. However, there is no evidence that a “reasonable person” would be aware that bugs are norma
defaultl or consider this
default a relevant circumstance
default. The position 
defaultwould
default be clearer if the fact that 
defaultthe 
defaultpresence of 
defaultbugs 
defaultis
default normal was 
defaultexpressly 
defaultmentioned 
defaultas a relevant circumstance 
defaultin subsection (5), but 
defaultunfortunately
default it is not. 
defaultWe recognise that some forms of dig
defaultital content (music and ebooks being perhaps the classic examples) are not expected to contain bugs. This could be catered for by specific reference to those forms of content.
defaultProposed section 37 (fitness for purpose). This provision is qualified by a requ
defaultirement of reasonableness. However, in this instance the position is even less clear
default than in proposed section 36
default. There is no reference to a “reasonable person” test but simply to “reasonableness”. Again there is no mention of the fact that bugs are normal
default.
defaultProposed section 38 (correspondence to description). Here the position is 
defaulteven
default worse because this requirement does not seem to be qualified by reasonableness at all
default, still less is there reference to bugs
default.
default 
defaultT
defaulthis problem is to a certain extent recognised in the 
defaultImpact Assessment:
default “Bugs are considered standard in digital content on issue and as such it is proposed that a reasonable person would expect a certain amount of bugs when purchasing digital content. Th
defaulterefore the existence of bugs will not necessarily amount to a breach of the guarantee as to quality and fitness. However as some forms of digital content, such as music, or e-books, can be expected to be of a very high quality, we will retain the ‘freedom
default from minor defects’ aspect of quality for digital content and clarify in guidance that bugs may be acceptable in some forms of content.
default”
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhile we welcome the fact that the problem has been recognised we do not consider that 
defaultthe proposal for 
defaultclarificatio
defaultn in guidance represents a satisfactory solution. First, such guidance would 
defaultnot have the authority of the statute and could therefore be ignored by a Court. Second, the provision of guidance involves another level of complexity for the consumer. 
defaultThird, th
defaultere is no evidence that a consumer would read any guidance. 
defaultFinally and in any event, we are not aware that any draft guidance has been published.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt seems to us that if these provisions are implemented in this form
default 
defaultt
defaulthis will result in 
defaultprecisely the 
defaultunsatisfactory results referred to in the Response to Consultations
default at page 28: “some consumers may think that they are entitled to a remedy which the business
default 
default[and, we would add, the Government and the Court] does not think it is obliged to provide under
default the current law. In such situations there is a risk that both the business and the consumer will spend time and money on an unnecessary dispute. There is also a reputational risk to business if it declines to provide the remedy the consumer wants. In addi
defaulttion, when consumers do experience problems and are unable to claim the remedy they expect, consumer confidence is undermined. This could disadvantage new entrants to the market in particular as consumers are driven towards established brands.”
default2. Proposeddefault section 48defaultThis proposed section provides for a consumer to be entitled to the cost of replacing hardware or other digital content if it has been damaged and that damage has been caused by digital content supplied under a contract. While we note that ther
defaulte is a “reasonable care and skill” defence, we also note that there is no requirement that the damage should have been reasonably foreseeable by the supplier nor is there a requirement that the consumer should have been using the digital content appropriat
defaultely (e.g. on suitable hardware or with compatible software). The result is that a supplier may be liable under this provision for damage caused in a wholly unforeseeable manner perhaps by the way in which a consumer has configured his or her computer. We c
defaultonsider that this places an unfair burden on the supplier.
defaultIn addition, it seems to us that many claims under this section will be difficult and expensive for suppliers to investigate. In those circumstances we consider that there is a real risk that this 
defaultsection will be misused by unscrupulous consumers who attempt to use it in order to obtain a new computer or software program at the expense of an innocent supplier. 
default3default. defaultProposed sdefaultection 49defaultThis section introduces a complete 
defaultprohibition
default on excluding or restricting liability for breach of the various implied terms referred to above and under proposed 
defaultsection
default 48
default.
default It seems that the 
defaultprohibition
default extends to all liabilities, not merely those specified in proposed 
defaultsections
default 45 and 46. This will l
defaulteave the software provider exposed to unlimited liability for damages for breach of contract (subject to the usual rules of causation and remoteness). Since such liabilities have generally been excluded or restricted in the past that involves a very substa
defaultntial change in the 
defaultlegal 
defaultlandscape for software providers
default and suppliers
default.
defaultSome of the liabilities 
default(or at least claims) 
defaultto which 
defaultsome or all 
defaultsoftware providers or suppliers may now be exposed 
defaultfor the first time 
defaultare as follows:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWe believe that this change will potentially have a chilling effect on risk-taking and innovation. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhile we would not suggest that there should be no liability in these circumstances we would propose that a more equitable approach would be to 
defaultpermit the
default exclusion or restriction of liability 
defaultto the extent that it is 
defaultreasonable to do so
default taking into accoun
defaultt factors analogous to those under the Unfair Terms in Consumer Contracts Regulations (SI 1999/2083)
default.
default That would enable the Courts to develop a fair and equitable system on a case by case basis.
default&#xa0;
defaultIf software publishers and others supplying digital content 
defaultare required to abandon standard and commercially-accepted limitations on liability then this could inevitably result in an increase in prices. Software publishers may price their products against their standard terms and in the expectation and understandi
defaultng that, if there is a claim, this will be limited - generally to the value of the product or, in case of subscription models, to the value of one year's fees. Insurance is not readily (or cheaply) available for breaches particularly in the areas of intell
defaultectual property, confidentiality or loss of data meaning that publishers may have to self-insure and set aside substantial funds against possible claims - funds which will need to be obtained by a marked increase in prices to their customers.
defaultB. Schedule 5default para. 20(4)defaultWe welcome the general principle of consolidating the various enforcement powers contained in a vast range of statutes. 
defaultWe also recognise that a balance needs to be struck between the effectiveness and efficiency of enforcement on the one hand
default and the reduction of the regulatory burden on businesses, the reduction of state intrusion and the protection of civil liberties on the other. 
defaultWe recognise that the Government is obliged to consider whether 
defaultadvance notice
default 
defaultbefore visits 
defaultis appropriate unde
defaultr Protection of Freedoms Act 2012. 
defaultThe effect of 
defaultproposed Schedule 5 para. 20(4) 
defaultis to introduce a requirement that advance notice be given by enforcers before entering premises for the purposes of ascertaining whether an offence has been committed (“the 
defaultnotice requirement”)
default subject to certain exceptions
default.
defaultFAST is reliant on Trading Standards Officers using their powers under the Trade Marks Act 1994 and the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 to enforce the criminal provisions of those Acts in relation
default to counterfeit and pirated software.
defaultOur members have mixed views on the change to 
defaultincorporate a
default notice requirement
default. 
defaultAn example of the current without notice 
defaultinspection power has
default resulted in illicit copies of software being removed from being purchased by unsuspecting consumers. In this instance, the Trading Standards Officer asked to see any software for sale under the counter in 
defaulta shop
default selling computers and related services. McA
defaultfee software discs
default were
default produced
default. There was a concern that these
default did not appear to be
default genuine and t
defaulthis was confirmed. As
default a result, 400 discs which were not genuine were identified and removed
default from sale and the supplier
default. 
defaultD
defaultigital evidence can be destroyed
default e
defaultasily
default. If 
defaulta trader 
defaultis 
defaultcommitting
default an offence with tangible
default items
default, 
defaultit is 
defaultmore di
defaultfficult to destroy 
defaultevidence. This is because 
defaultsomething physical 
defaulthas
default to 
defaultbe got
default rid of.
default In comparison,
default digital 
defaultcopies or content may be 
defaultvery eas
defaultily 
defaultdestroy
defaulted
default without leaving a trac
defaulte if advance notice is given
default.
defaultWhilst we accept 
defaultthe general principle of consolidating the various enforcement powers contained in a vast range of statutes
default, w
defaulte consider that Government should 
defaultbe cognisant 
defaultthat 
defaultthe change may 
defaultdeter 
defaultTrading Standards
default from 
defaultcar
defaultrying out checks. T
defaulthe figures in the Impact Assessment
default 
defaultshow
default local authorities are cutting back on their budgets so that the absolute number of inspections is going to fall in any event (Impact Assessment para. 47).
defaultIn this instance we 
defaultsubmit that this pro
defaultposal
default could
default 
defaultmean
default that certain
default illicit
default activity may slip through the net unnoticed and 
defaultTrading Standards 
defaultmay be
default put off from 
defaultchecks under a
default notice requirement
default regime
default. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultLawyers who are members of the FAST Legal Advisory Group were provided with access 
defaultto a draft of 
defaultthis paper for co
defaultnsideration
default. The following have given their consent to be referenced:
defaultAndew Moir, Partner, Herbert Smith Freehills
defaultDawn Osborne, 
defaultPartner, 
defaultPalmer Biggs Legal
defaultJonathan Cornthwaite, Partner, 
defaultWedlake Bell 
default&#xa0;
default27 August 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/206435/bi
defaults-13-910-consumer-rights-bill-proposals-supply-of-digital-content-impact.pdf
default 
default p. 37.
default Bradgate: Consumer Rights in Digital Products 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/31837/10-1125-consumer-rights-in-digital-products.pdf
default para. 23.
default&#xa0;
default Bradgate: Consumer Rights in Digital Products 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/31837/10-1125-consumer-rights-in-digital-products.pdf
default para. 179.
default P
defaultaras
default 162 
defaultand 16
default3 
defaultof the Explanatory Notes to the Bill 
defaultcould be read as suggesting otherwise. However, we assume that the Government is not intending to introduce such a major change without flagging it up
default.
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/206435/bis-13-910-consumer-rights-bill-proposals-supply-of-digital-conte
defaultnt-impact.pdf
default 
default p. 35.
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads
default/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/206373/bis-13-916-draft-consumer-rights-bill-governemnt-response-to-consultations-on-consumer-rights.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/206439/bis-13-913-enhancing-consumer-confidence-generic-set-of-consumer-law-powers-impact.pdf
default 
default