&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Society of Biology (RaD0008)default&#xa0;
defaultThe Society of Biology
default welcomes the Committee’s attention to 
defaultresearch and 
defaultdevelopment
default fund
defaulting for science and technology; a core sector that
default underpins the UK’s economic stability through n
defaultovel products and job creation, and is pleased to have sight of the detailed analysis in the National Audit Office memorandum on this topic. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe NAO
default memorandum confirms
default the value of R&amp;D carried out by UK business, where the life science
defaults play a major role and
default biotechnolo
defaultgy and pharmaceutical companies are 
defaultthe dominating sectors. 
defaultThe UK business R
default&amp;
defaultD spend, for which tax incentives are so import
defaultant, is bolstered by our particular strengths in 
defaultlife sciences, 
defaultsoftware, 
defaultand 
defaultadvanced engineering research 
defaultthat
default attract 
defaultsubstantial
default Foreign Direct Investment
default. The UK’s talent and attractive research environment is strengthened 
defaultby 
defaultBIS
default’s commitment
default to improve the interface betwee
defaultn Higher Education Institutions 
defaultand businesses, and supportive statements by 
defaultG
defaultovernment that 
default'investment in science is an investment in our future
default’
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultAt both the 2010 and 2013 spending reviews
default, Government 
defaultrecognised the sustained excellence of the science sector with a 
defaultflat
default cash 
defaultsettlement for the resource budget. Although we welcomed the ring fence, 
defaultwe note that 
defaultif the Government want
defaults a growth economy, it must support a sector that employs more than 
default5.4m 
defaultUK workers
default and provides 
defaultan impressive return on investment.
default A
defaultbove inflation growth in the science budget is 
defaulttherefore 
defaultneeded if the sciences are to deliver their full potential for improving the economy and wellbeing. It is essential that the virtual cuts
default in the science budget are reversed if the research community is to deliver the full benefit the country needs.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe UK is currently the number one in Europe in terms of Foreign Direct Investment, but maintaining our i
defaultnternational competitively is crucial, 
defaultparticularly
default as the global economy changes 
defaultand
default BRIC 
defaultnations advance. 
default 
defaultThe NAO memorandum clearly shows that the UK is falling behind on
default 
defaultR&amp;D intensity at just 1.9%, way off the 3% target for 
defaultthe European Commission by 
default2020.  
defaultThe UK’s failure to 
defaultaim for
default this target is concerning and contradictory to Government rhetoric on the importance of the UK science sector.
default&#xa0;
defaultGovernment Departments have a key role in funding research outside of public labs, and should be seen as an i
defaultntegral part of the UK’s research ecosystem.  This area of funding has been severely hit by recent cuts, creating concern about training, skills development and policy- relevant research across the sciences. These budgets should also be taken into consider
defaultation when investigating the resilience of the UK science sector. 
default&#xa0;defaultPublic Sector Research Establishmentsdefault default(PSREs)defaultCertain PRSEs carry out a range of vital services across the life sciences, and provide essential expertise for increasingly complex and 
defaultrelevant policy issues including human health, the agriculture sector and sustainable food provision, the green economy and national safety:
defaultFuture InquiriesdefaultThere are several lines of inquiry that the Select Committee may like to consider which would be beneficial to the UK 
defaultscience R
default&amp;
defaultD sector. The Society of Biology suggests the following:
default 
defaultRecently Government has increased capital funding though specific infrastructure announcements such as  the £50m for a National Graphene Institute, inv
defaultestment in scientifi
defaultc facilities, including The Francis Crick Institute and Pharmavision,  and £150 million of capital investment in 2015-16 to fund health research infrastructure in the areas of dementia, genomics and imaging. Funding is also promised for the ‘Great Eight’ t
defaultechnologies for which analysis has suggested Government should be promoting with further capital investment and technology support
default. R&amp;D funding is welcome where it is needed and of most use, but does this shift toward directed funding conflict with the es
defaulttablished Haldane Principle? The Chancellor stated in his 2013 Spending Review announcement: 
default‘
defaultOur philosophy is simple: trust people to make their own decisions and they will usually make better ones’
default.
default 
defaultWhat are the processes for deciding the allocation of 
defaultcapital funding? How should this best integrate with the Research Council’s remit and activities?
defaultThe pharmaceutical 
defaults
defaultector is a key driver for innovation in the UK, however o
defaultver recent years pharmaceutical R&amp;D within the UK has 
defaultundergone a significant transformation. An ecosystem of collaborative research partners is emerging which encompasses small and large pharma, SMEs, academia, health charities and the NHS, with each contributing complementary skills and expertise. Job losse
defaults at UK sites for GSK, AstraZeneca and Pfizer in recent years 
defaultcannot be ignored. What is the future for UK Pharma, and how can the Government ensure its continued success?
defaultThe BIS R&amp;D Scoreboards were 
defaultdiscontinued in 2012 because of budgetary concerns. These scoreboards allowed for transparent, impartial and up to date evaluation of the level of R&amp;D activity in the UK, tracking of historical data trends and benchmarking of UK R&amp;D activity against other 
defaultnations. Given global fiscal uncertainty, we argue that this type of analysis firms up policy decision making, and 
defaultcould help to inform and encourage 
default investment in 
defaultthe 
defaultUK by highlighting our strengths and allowing for closer inspection of where policies a
defaultre, or are not working. How has the discontinuation affected the ability for Government and others to track policy and investment efficacy? Has this type of analysis been picked up elsewhere, and if so, 
defaultto what budgetary costs?
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default              
default 
defaultDepartment for Business Innovation and Skills 
defaultLeverage from public funding of science and research
default. Dr Sarah Main. June 2013
default Chancellor George Osborne - 2013 Spending Review Ann
defaultouncement 
default 
defaultThe Science Council 
defaultThe current and future UK science workforce
default September 2011.  
default&#xa0;
default Department of Health – 
defaultStructure of Public Health England
default, July 2012
default House of Commons Science ad Technology Select Committee. 
default2nd Report - Forensic science -
default Volume I
default . July 2013. 
default 
defaulthttp://www.policyexchange.org.uk/images/publications/eight%20great%20technologies.pdf
default 
default 
defaultThe Society of Biology is a core mem
defaultber of the 
defaultDrug Discovery Pathways Group
default, an informal partnership that seeks to address these issues by 
defaultestablishing a networked community of skilled researchers to help revitalise the UK pharmaceutical sector. The group
default defaultfocusses on three main areas;
default defaultindustry-academia
default defaultpartnerships
default, defaultknowledge
default defaultand
default defaultskills, with around
default default20 learned societies and professional bodies involved in specific activities and work streams.
default 
defaulthttps://www.societyofbiology.org/policy/policy-issues/biomedical-sciences/drug-discovery/drug-discovery-pathways-group
default