&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultCommunity First (TIC 030)
default&#xa0;defaultWiltshire Council 
defaultis 
defaultcurrently consulting with local Area Boards, Community Area Partnerships Parish Councils, users and local transport providers about changes to local bus services in a an effort to meet local needs in a cost-effectiv
defaulte way.
defaultWiltshire Council 
defaultis 
defaultalso undertaking surveys of existing bus service use in order that changes to the bus service network can be made according to demand.
defaultTo mitigate against the effects of changes to local bus services, Wiltshire Council ha
defaults
default also consulted with Community First (who in turn canvassed opinions form Community Transport groups) regarding the establishment of a Community Transport business growth social enterprise (established in 2012 called Accelerate) and a Community Transport d
defaultevelopment fund.
defaultLastly
default t
defaulthe Council 
defaultis 
defaultresponding
default to consultation on rail matter
defaults
default undertaken in 2011/12 having submitted a successful bid to the 
defaultDfT’s Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF) to improve Wiltshire’s rail offer.
defaultAs part of the early development of Wiltshire Councils’ Third Local 
defaultTransport Plan (LTP3) Wiltshire Council invited various stakeholders and other interested parties to attend one of four consultation workshops to discuss the development of the LTP3.
defaultWiltshire Council 
defaultalso 
defaulthas
default current
default links with the Wilts
defaulth
defaultire and Swindon U
defaultser’s Network (
defaulta user-led organisation representing people who use health and social services locally) an
defaultd 
defaulty
defaultoung people’s transport issues via the Wiltshire Assembly of Youth
default. Wiltshire Council also undertakes regular consultations with
default&#xa0;
defaultlocal residents and
default service users, with many of these surveys carried out in partnership with other
default&#xa0;
defaultlocal public service
default&#xa0;
defaultbodies (see for more details: 
defaulthttp://www.intelligencenetwork.org.uk/consultation/
default)
default&#xa0;defaultIn relation to bus services the challenges are often related to funding. As the market is de-regulated the scope for private bus operators to look beyond the sustainability of their own 
defaultoperations
default is lim
defaultited despite some useful initiatives
default such as Quality 
defaultBus 
defaultPartnerships
default and Better Bus Areas.
defaultThere is however a broader issue of the marketing of bus services to encourage bus use more generally. Locally bus users tend to be mainly older people and those on low incomes. If there was a 
defaultsustained 
defaultnational 
defaultmarke
defaultting 
defaultcampaign to promote bus 
defaultuse 
default- 
defaultfor instance as a wise 
defaultfinancial
default as well as environmental choice
default -
default this would make 
defaultthe economics of bus use far easier. In 
defaultsome other European countries
default such campaigns 
defaultseem
default prevalent and unnecessary car use seems to becom
defaulting culturally less 
defaultacceptable
default 
defaultas a result.
defaultIn relation to rail services, it is vitally important that smaller stations are not disregarded by train companies in order to improve performance to larger rail hubs and that rail line electrification is conside
defaultred carefully in this respect. Please see 
defaulthttp://www.pewseytrainwatch.co.uk/
default ; 
defaulthttp://www.bedwyntrains.org.uk/
default and 
defaulthttp://www.westburytrainwatch.org.uk/
default for more details.
defaultLastly in relation to rail, whilst 
defaultWiltshire Councils’ successful bid to the DfT’s Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF) to improve Wiltshire’s 
defaultrail offer will help to provide better and more consi
defaultstent rail services locally, 
defaultit
default is
default important that rail services 
defaultresulting from this connect with bus services to 
defaultprovide passengers with integrated journey
default options.
default&#xa0;defaultBased on the most recent data available, there were 10.4 million passenger trips undertaken by bus in Wiltshire compared to 260,000 passenger trip
defaults undertaken by Community Transport (CT) schemes in Wiltshire. 
defaultThere are
default however over 60 CT
default schemes across Wiltshire
default but these groups are mainly fairly small in scale and scope. 
default To make a real impression in addressing the needs of passengers in isolated 
defaultcommunities (e.g. to support local CT schemes to respond to changes in local bus services) sustained support funding is needed for infrastructure organisations such as Community First.
defaultWhilst the DfT Supporting Community Transport (CT) funding is welcome, 
defaultit is relatively modest and also appears to be ‘one-off.’ Sustained investment (e.g. over 5 years or so) from the Government is needed in the CT sector in order for it to grow to the level required to make a significant difference in addressing the needs o
defaultf passengers in isolated communities.
defaultL
defaultocal 
defaultCT support 
defaultfunding differences 
defaultalso 
defaultneed to be addressed – for instance w
defaulthilst Community First receives funding from Wiltshire Council to provide support to CT schemes in Wiltshire, there is no funding for this s
defaultupport provided by Swindon Borough Council.
defaultIn addition investment in simple car sharing initiatives / support for 
defaultfacilitating 
defaultcar sharing at the local level could have a significant impact in addressing the needs of passengers in isolated communities. Th
defaultere is already evidence locally of car sharing happening ‘under the radar’ but having proper investment in local car sharing could realize both accessibility 
default(
defaultand environmental
default)
default objectives relatively straightforwardly.
default&#xa0;
defaultTaxis could be used as an important part of the transport mix in addressing the needs
default of passengers in isolated communities. For instance if taxis are used to provide a failsafe option as part of a car sharing scheme
default 
default(e.g. through taxi vouchers or similar) then they could have a useful role to play. Similarly a web-based live portal for ta
defaultxi operators to use to advertise ‘dead’ journeys may also be useful in advertising journey opportunities / bring down journey costs for passengers.
defaultDemand responsive transport (DRT) services will only become cost effect
defaultive (to both commissioners and users)
default if they are widely used. This will only come about if they are marketed extremely well and the law around pre-booking these services is relaxed. 
default 
defaultOtherwise the cost of providing these services as things currently stand is likely to lead to their demise.
default&#xa0;defaultThe main challenges are related to the fact that there are fewer passengers available to be carried and often th
defaultey are spread over a larger geographical area than in urban areas.
defaultSolutions
default, however, 
defaultdo not have to be expensive. Community Transport schemes and initiatives such as car sharing are cost effective to run and are therefore affordable for passengers. More 
defaultinvestment in these services
default and the marketing of them
default is therefore needed.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1
default&#xa0;
default