&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Academy of Social Sciences (RaD014)default1.1  defaultThe
default Academy of Social Sciences welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Committee’s Inquiry into R&amp;D funding and request for suggestions for future topics of inquiry in this area. The Academy represents a membership composed of over 900 individual peer-elec
defaultted social scientists, and 46 Learned Societies in social science disciplines.  
default1.2  defaultWith reference to the National Audit Office’s (2013)
default Review of Research and Development funding of science and technology in the UK
default (henceforth NAO (2013)), the Academy e
defaultndorses the view of R&amp;D as a crucial metric of innovation.  Without a strong research base covering all academic disciplines (social sciences and humanities as well as the STEM subjects) innovative products cannot be generated and brought to market.  Techn
defaultological inventions are successful when they are considered useful, appealing and affordable – these qualities require expertise in human-computer interaction, economics and marketing – all social science inputs. And innovative solutions to social issues a
defaultnd challenges may not be found, or successfully applied in society, without social science research.  
default1.3  defaultIn NAO (2013) the overall rise in annual R&amp;D spending (37%) recorded between 1995 and 2011 has different implications for different academic discipl
defaultines.  According to the report most of this increase came from growth in UK businesses’ spend on R&amp;D - although this spend has been affected in recent years by the economic crisis (NAO, 2013:6).  Government support for UK business R&amp;D has increased, making
default up part of the reduction in funding from non-government sources.  The commercial R&amp;D spend in the UK is dominated by the pharmaceutical industries and hence chiefly uses STEM R&amp;D. 
default1.4 defaultThe Higher Education Institutions (HEIs) are a particularly important 
defaultin the R&amp;D landscape of the UK, contributing 27% of R&amp;D untaken, compared to an OECD average of 19%.  However, the UK has not been increasing investment in this sector at the same rate as competitor countries, which may have implications for future perform
defaultance.  Subject Overview Reports undertaken for the 2008 RAE consistently found excellence in social science disciplines across UK HEIs, and benchmarking undertaken by the ESRC and learned societies since 2005, demonstrates that the UK is world-leading in m
defaultany social science subjects. 
defaultThe Department for Business, Innovation and Skills document 
defaultInternational Comparative Performance of the UK Research Base
default – 2011
default confirms that the UK’s strength in the social sciences is second only to that of the USA
default,
default and that this strength is growing over time.
default  Social sciences are therefore a vital part of the knowledge economy in UK HEIs. 
default1.5 defaultNAO (2013) notes the significant level of European funding for research received by the UK, an area where social science res
defaultearch has been a key beneficiary.  The report acknowledges that it is hard to determine to what extent the research funded under the 7
defaultth
default Framework meets the ONS definition of R&amp;D used in the publication.  This definition, which comes from the OECD, may exc
defaultlude some social science research activity related to policy, and hence underplay the importance of funding in these areas and outcomes derived from such research. 
default1.6 defaultEuropean funding has been an important component in the strength of UK social science R
default&amp;D in recent decades.  The Academy of Social Sciences recently put out a call to Academicians to cite examples of the role of EU funding in their work, and received a strong and positive response.  UK social scientists are involved in EU-funded projects br
defaultinging in millions of euros and maintaining engagement in EU-wide intellectual and enterprise networks.  ERC figures on the number of grantholders by country of host institution per call year for the last 5-6 years show the UK as having 
defaultaround twice the nu
defaultmber of grantholders as the country ranked second on number of grantees.  UK social sciences have also benefited greatly from funding under FP7 and its predecessors.  Cross-national research across European partnerships has contributed to greater internati
defaultonalisation of European social sciences and more effective dissemination of ideas and approaches to problems. Our level of international collaboration is a distinctive advantage for the UK in comparison with the USA and other English-speaking countries.
default1.default7 defaultEuropean funding has also enabled interdisciplinary projects to gain support which may have fallen between natural science and social science funding sources in the UK.  Examples include the Surveille advisory project which involves UK researchers in giv
defaulting advice to technology developers, manufacturers  and end users who want to discuss the ethics and fundamental rights implications of their work; research in language-learning and linguistics and studies bringing together social and environmental aspects
default of sustainable development.  As EU funding concentrates on issues that are high priority across the Europe and addressed by Community policies, the links between research and policy are often strong.  
default1.8 defaultInterdisciplinary research has been strengthened 
defaultby the implementation of cross-cutting themes in Research Council funding in recent years.  The ESRC is the only Research Council funded under all of the themes, underlining the utility and versatility of social science approaches. However, there remains m
defaultore to be done in terms of linking natural and social sciences activities. Social science contributions could further aid the effectiveness of public engagement with natural science and medical research in fields such as ageing and well-being.  
default1.9 defaultNAO (20
default13) 
defaultrefers to the ‘Thomson Reuters 2012 list of Top 100 Global Innovators’ which lists the most innovative companies worldwide.  The metrics used look at patents obtained; as well as ‘
defaultfavouring fast-paced high-tech industries with short product life lifecy
defaultcles rather than the pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies that dominate R&amp;D in the UK’
default (NAO, 2013:9), such assessment is unlikely to capture innovation in creative industries or in management, services and the financial sector – all areas relevant to
default social science and humanities R&amp;D, and where the UK is strong internationally.
defaultThe Academy’s view of the 2013 Spending Reviewdefault2.1 defaultThe Academy of Social Sciences welcomed the Chancellor’s continued ring-fencing of the science budget, which includes social
default science.  As estimates suggest that there has been a real terms cut of money available to science and research of around 14% during the current Public Expenditure period to 2015, 
default challenges remain
default in terms of 
defaultmaintaining
default excellence and international stan
defaultding. The Academy also welcomed the increase in capital spending the Chancellor set out – without adequate capital investment there is a risk of introducing damaging ‘stop-start’ inefficiencies into the system. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3 defaultCapital
default defaultinvestment in the science 
defaultinfrastructure – the kit underpinning discovery in the natural sciences – has been identified as key to economic growth.  We would contend that the social science infrastructure of large-scale data sources is also essential to innovation.  The British coho
defaultrt studies provide excellent evidence which feeds into government policies.  Such resources are all the more important in times of rapid health and welfare reform in a climate of austerity.  The Government also has its own resources of large-scale national
default surveys – the future of several of which is currently under review.  We hope that the underpinning support of social science datasets will not be forgotten in the allocation of capital investment for growth.
default2.default4default defaultThe Academy expressed concern about the inc
defaultreased burden upon students created by not increasing grants by the rate of inflation. 
defaultUniversities are having increasing difficulty recruiting the best domestic 
defaultpostgraduate 
defaultstudents because of the pressures of student debt.  It is vital that our own 
defaultstud
defaultents have the opportunity to study in our world-class Universities – otherwise we risk our excellence being exported, without sustaining domestic research power.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 defaultThe Academy has stated its case to the Government vigorously, pointing out that an impor
defaulttant part of introducing scientific innovation is knowing how this will affect the economy and society. 
defaultSocial sciences are a vital part of the research-innovation-impact cycle, bringing scientific discovery into widespread use. Without understanding of so
defaultcial, economic, political and cultural processes underlying innovation - both in its development and adoption phases - future economic growth will be jeopardised.
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultSuggestions defaultfor defaultfuture inquiries on UK R&amp;D fundingdefault3.1 defaultThe Academy suggests that the Committee examine the role of social science R&amp;D in innovation. In assessing the impact and value of R&amp;D and in improving the interface between HEIs and business, there has been an emphasis on commercialisation of research thr
defaultough patents and spin-outs.  These vital activities are predominantly based in STEM disciplines, but they are not the only form of knowledge transfer or innovative work going on in HEIs.  
default3.2 defaultThe UK IRC (2009) survey of 
defaultKnowledge Exchange between Academic
defaults and the Business, Public and Third Sectors
default makes the case for a wider perspective on the role of universities in innovation, saying that:
default‘knowledge exchange mechanisms are wide and varied – it is not simply about the codified transfer of science (patent
defaults, licences, etc.) but includes many people-based, problem-solving and community-driven activities’ 
default(page 7)
defaultThese latter activities are very much the province of social sciences and ensure not only that technological innovations get to market and are take
defaultn up in society, but also work in their own right to build relationships and activities which contribute to economic growth.
default3.3 defaultWhilst natural sciences may produce the ‘direct hits’ of new drugs, new agricultural methods or new aids to independent living, it is social sciences which analyse and explain how (and if) such innovations are successfully used and diffused through societi
defaultes; the cultural and other barriers to their acceptability; unintended consequences of their application.  Without a thriving social science research community (and investment in foresight and horizon scanning) both innovation and policymaking are at risk 
defaultof problems resulting from the neglect of the human and social elements in establishing what works, both in terms of innovation and democratic communications.
default&#xa0;
default3.4 defaultSuch insights touch on social science research into the links between universities and local
default economic growth.  Academician Prof. John Goddard, a leading authority in this field, has described how universities active in developing effective partnerships in their localities, have moved beyond purely ‘entrepreneurial’ models of innovation to become 
default‘civic’ institutions with a wider model of engagement in local economies and societies.
default&#xa0;default3.5 defaultThese broader models of successful knowledge transfer have implications for how impact of research is measured, and indicate scope for how R&amp;D funding may meet the
default challenge of regional growth in the future.
default3.6 defaultAn ongoing issue is to establish if, how, why research evidence has been used effectively in innovation policy, and this could be another area of future inquiry.  This will be especially relevant as the new 
default‘What Works?’ initiatives get established and the extent to which they feed into Departmental policies becomes observable.  
default3.7 defaultThere has been increasing attention on evaluation of interventions and social policy impacts themselves, both within academic a
defaultnd practitioner communities and in Government departments.  Evaluation methods, including the wider use of RCTs, could be another area of inquiry.  Research into innovation in service delivery by public bodies, and issues in learning across sectors and cou
defaultntries, would also be worthy of investigation  
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default