&#xa0;
defaultRMP 03default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Institute of Directorsdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultAbout the IoD:defaultThe IoD was founded in 1903 and obtained a Royal Charter in 1906. It is an independent, non-party political 
defaultorganisation of approximately 38
default,000 individual members. Its aim is to serve, support, represent and set standards for directors to enable them to f
defaultulfil their leadership responsibilities in creating wealth for the benefit of business and society as a whole. The membership is drawn from right 
defaultacross the business spectrum. 70
default% of FTSE 100 companies and 60% of FTSE 350 companies have IoD members on thei
defaultr boards, but the majority of members, some 7
default0
default%, comprise directors of small and medium-sized enterprises, ranging from long-established businesses to start-up companies. IoD members’ organisations are entrepreneurial and resolutely growth orientated. Over
default half of members export. They are at the forefront of flexible working practices and are fully committed to the skills agenda.
default&#xa0;
defaultResponse:default&#xa0;
defaultThe Institute of Directors is pleased that the Business, Innovation and Skills Committee has given us the chance to 
defaultcomment on the proposed privatisation of Royal Mail.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe IoD believes that the Government is 
defaultright
default to pursue the privatisation of Royal Mail, which will allow it to modernise, compete and survive. Royal Mail is in good health currently, but it still faces significant challenges as the way businesses and individuals communicate 
defaultchanges over time.
default Releas
defaulting it from public ownership will allow it access the private capital it needs so that it can invest and adapt its service to meet future needs.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn particular, the Institute of Directors notes the conclusions of the Independent Review of the Posta
defaultl Sector
default led by Richard Hooper, which suggests that necessary modernisation can only occur via the injection of private capital.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultBusinesses need and value the universal service, and note that the continuation of that service is enshrined in law, and that withdra
defaultwal of the service would require an Act of Parliament
default. We also note that Ofcom has a primary duty to secure the prov
defaultision of the universal service, providing a secondary safeguard to the service.
default Within this framework, we are pleased that Royal Mail will b
defaulte given the ability to compete in the same regulatory landscape as private competitors, allowing it to c
defaulthallenge those providers for 
defaultthe high-growth areas of the market
default. Furthermore, a modernised Royal Mail will further incentivise existing private operato
defaultrs to improve their services for businesses and consumers alike.
default&#xa0;
defaultI
defaultt is crucial that the privatisation of the Royal Mail delivers value to the taxpayer. We are pleased that the Government has stated this as a priority, and we would expect close monitoring 
defaultof the process to ensure this positive outcome. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Institute of Directors is also of the belief that the offer given to Royal Mail employees is sensible and generous. We are particularly glad that current staff will be given the chance to become employe
defaulte owners, an arrangement which is beneficial to both employer and employee. The IoD 
defaultbelieves
default that threatened strike action would be unjustified, highly irresponsible, and would hit
default the economy and businesses hard – just as strikes in 2007 and 2009 did. A t
defaulthird strike within six years would
default serve only to undermine the reputat
defaultion of the Royal Mail and could, in so doing, mean that the positive outcomes of the privatisation process are 
defaultlessened
default by reputational damage. 
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusion:default&#xa0;
defaultRoyal Mail is a clear 
defaultexample of an organisation which, if it fails to move forward, will be overtaken by the competition
default,
default creating a drag on the public purse. It is only competitive forces that will inspire 
defaultmuch-needed progress. The G
defaultovernment must hold firm in its commitment 
defaultto modernising this vital service, allowing it to respond to changing trends in the way businesses and consumers use the postal service.
default&#xa0;
default28 August 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default