&#xa0;
defaultEIS 02
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the UK Minerals Forum (UKMF)default&#xa0;defaultExecutive Summary:default defaultThe UK Minerals Forum (UKMF), established in 2007 and funded by the CBI Minerals Group, brings together representatives of the UK’s onshore extractivdefaulte industries, NGOs with a particular interest in the environmental impacts of mineral extraction, the sector’s research organisation, local government planners and observers from central government, the territorial administrations and the main statutory redefaultgulators.  It aims to discuss matters of common interest in a neutral forum, away from the pressures of traditional lobbying, campaigning, and formal dialogue with government and its agencies over regulatory policy, legislation, minerals supply and environdefaultmental protection.  The Forum sponsors Working Groups to look in more detail at matters of particular concern. These report back not only to UKMF itself but also to the wider public through suitable websites and the biennial CBI defaultLiving with Minerals defaultConferdefaultences.  They are followed up with government as appropriate.  Accordingly, UKMF offers itself as an example of Best Practice in extractive industry-NGO engagement.defaultSubmission:default2007-2008:
default              
defaultDeclining mineral reserves and the futu
defaultre security of supply; Mineral E
defaultxtraction in the Nation
defaultal Parks and AONBs;
default Carbon and Proximity in minerals supply; 
defaultCumulat
defaultive I
defaultmpacts in
default policy, l
defaultegislation and regulation.  (Reported to 
defaultLiving with Minerals 3 in November 2008
default);
default2010-2011:
default              
defaultDistributing minerals to future markets; Planning Skills [training specialist mineral planners], Communities and communication. (Reported 
defaultto 
defaultLiving with Minerals 4 in November 2011
default):
default2013-2014:
default              
default[in progress]: Future minerals supply (
defaultFuture minerals scenarios for the UK – looking 30+ years ahead
default). (To be reported to 
defaultLiving with Minerals 5 in November 2014
default).
defaultReports and recommendations from 
defaultthe Working Groups are sent as appropriate to Government Departments, or followed up in other ways as far as limited resources permit, including publishing material on Forum website hosted by the BGS and members’ websites (e.g. at CBI, MIRO and several min
defaulteral trade associations).
defaultFollowing the 2010-2011 cycle of work, discussions are in progress with the Institute of Quarrying on developing an economical and readily accessible distance learning module for local authority planners new to minerals work, to h
defaultelp get them up to speed quickly on the special features and legislative and procedural framework that applies to mineral planning  This is aimed at dealing with a perceived shortage of relevant expertise which causes avoidable delays in the preparation of
default minerals plans and decisions on applications for permissions.  Also arising from the 2011-2012 Working Group on improving the extractive industries’ communications with the wider public, which is so often initially hostile to proposals for onshore mineral
default extraction, discussions are being held with the Earth Science Teachers Association and the Geological Society of whether some core material on UK-won minerals could be included in suitable parts of the revised secondary school syllabus.
defaultThe UKMF is entirely focussed on the relationship between the extractive industries operating in 
defaultthe UK and central and local government, statutory regulators and the voluntary environmental NGOs.  A key advantage in its approach to issues of common interest and concern is its culture.  It works as a round-table, is non-adversarial and inclusive, and 
defaultis founded on mutual respect for members’ differing objectives and points of view.  This is of particular benefit in view of the potential for conflicts between the need for minerals by society and the economy and the possibility of adverse impacts of mine
defaultral working on habitats, landscape, heritage and hydrology, which, where present, need to be contained by mitigating measures to an acceptable level.
defaultWhat makes this mode of dialogue possible is a set of shared values and common assumptions about governanc
defaulte and civic society in the UK; the rule of law, a high standard of competence and probity in the public services and a generally consultative culture in the preparation of legislation and its application by the statutory regulators, backed up by impartial 
defaultoversight by the courts.
defaultAfter 6 years the UKMF is still evolving, and its continuation is of course highly dependent on the interest, support and motivation of its membership, very largely provided 
defaultpro bono
default in addition to 
defaultmembers’ 
defaultregular work and activit
defaulties.  However, 
defaultat the level of national policy making and strategic analysis of the present and future state of mineral extraction in the UK, it has since 2007 provided an arena that is not otherwise available, and as such it must be considered as a best p
defaultractice example in response to the question identified in 1. above.
defaultWhether its model could be adopted by UK-based mineral extractors in their relations with governments, regulators and NGO in respect of their overseas operations is not for UKMF to say.  However, 
defaultfor the core principles of round-table non-adversarial discu
defaultssion in a climate of mutual respect to work it would need the same acceptance by all the parties of 
defaultthe factors on which UKMF relies in the UK: 
defaultgood state governance, peaceful society
default, probity in industry - government relations, NGOs with an understanding
default and basic acceptance of the economic drivers of mineral extraction
default and respect for the rule of law.
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default