&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from
default Fare Enough (TIC 038)
defaultFare Enough is the campaign raising awareness of the poor working conditions of private hire drivers in the UK.  The campaign was established
default by Samuel Fisher after his experiences of attempting to start Greenbean Cars, Leeds' first environmentally friendly private hire service, in 2010.
default1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultProblems associated with the provision of private hire services in isolated communitiesdefault1.1.
default 
defaultIsolated communitie
defaults in northern cities, such as those on low incomes and the elderly, often rely upon the private hire industry to make trips that are otherwise very difficult using the public transport network. This note sets out how private hire services can rely upon the
default exploitation of private hire drivers who often end up working in conditions of financial servitude.  It also sets out why the working conditions of private hire drivers appear to vary dramatically across the country.
default The note specifically examines the pri
defaultvate hire industry which is a pre-booked services as opposed to the taxi and hackney carriage which can be hailed on the street.
default1.2.default 
defaultThe private hire car industry is a major employment sector in this country, with over 231,000 drivers holding private hire lice
defaultnces in England &amp; Wales. Whilst a proportion of these drivers are employed, the overwhelming majority operate as self-employed agents working under licensed operators with radio circuits. There are widespread concerns about the working conditions of privat
defaulte hire drivers, the amount of debt they enter into each week in order to receive work from the licensed operators and the amount of hours that they need work in order to pay off their debts and earn a basic income. None of these issues appear to come withi
defaultn the remit of a regulatory authority. This is in contrast to the far fewer drivers working in the bus and coach sector (131,000 across the UK), who fall clearly within a regulated vocational transport profession, who mostly work for employers and whose wo
defaultrking hours are strictly limited and largely controlled by the use of tachographs to ensure the safety of the public.
default2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultExecutive Summarydefault2.1.
default 
defaultPrivate hire drivers in northern towns and cities provide an essential service to isolated communities but are heavily 
defaultexploited.
default2.2.
default 
defaultPrivate hire drivers have to overcome typical weekly overheads of £420 (see section 
default6
default) .  Consequently a private hire driver often earns no more than £2.00 per hour for a 50 hour week.  Drivers will typically work 70 hours per week, compromising
default road safety and the relationships with their families.
default2.3.
default 
defaultSuch exploitation persists because private hire drivers are not usually represented by trade unions.  Similarly, drivers have historically been considered by the courts to be self employed and therefo
defaultre unprotected by the National Minimum Wage and Race Relations Act (which renders them vulnerable to labour exploitation and race discrimination cf 
defaultMingeley v Pennock And Ivory t/a Amber Cars (2004, IRLR 373))
default2.4.
default 
defaultThe exploitation of drivers is systemic and a 
defaultconsequence of the radio-rental business model employed almost universally by private hire operators. 
default2.5.default 
defaultThe Law Commission is currently reviewing the private hire and taxi industry on behalf of the Department for Transport with the purpose of proposing whol
defaultesale reform.  They are expected to 
defaultsubmit a draft Bill to Parliament by the end of this year. Its remit however does not include factors relating to the working conditions of private hire or taxi drivers
default.
default              
default3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIntroductiondefault3.1.default 
defaultFrom my experience as a private hire
default operator and a private hire vehicle leasing business in Leeds it appears the poor working conditions of private hire drivers directly relate to the radio-rental business model employed universally by operators across the city (see section
default 5)
default.  Unfortunate
defaultly, the radio-rental model is open to abuse by unscrupulous operators taking advantage of its drivers who are unable to protect themselves through employment law or trade unions.  The radio-rental model puts significant downward pressure on fare prices whi
defaultch leads to drivers earning as little as £2 per hour for a 50 hour week.  When the major operator in a city chooses to suppress fare levels it forces smaller operators to behave in a similar fashion to keep their prices in line with the market rate.
default  I
defaultniti
defaultal research indicates that this is the predominant practice of operators in many towns and cities outside of London.
default4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultPolitical and legal context default4.1.
default 
defaultThe Law Commission is currently undertaking a review 
defaultof taxi and private hire services. The Law Commission's 
defaulttaxi and private hire services impact assessment (July 2012) recognises that 
defaultvulnerable groups such as those on low income 
defaultand those with impaired mobility 
default'constitute a significant proportion of users'.  As acknowledged in the Commission's consultation 
defaultpaper (May 2012) people in the lowest 20% of incomes are
default 40% more likely to use taxis and private hire vehicles than those in the highest 20%.  Any reforms that protect drivers therefore need to recognise that an absence of a viable service for isolated co
defaultmmunities would effectively restrict their opportunity for travel, be it for leisure or business
default.  Nonetheless this service should not be guaranteed through the exploitation of its drivers.
default4.2.
default 
defaultThe Employment Appeal Tribunal and the Court of Appeal 
defaulthave often 
defaultfound private hire drivers to be self employed and therefore unprotected by National Minimum Wage legislation.
default  There is concern that only the interests of the operator and consumer are taking precedence within the Commission's review  since the 
defaultCommission has stated that reviewing the employment status of drivers is not within the remit of their review.  Since a reliable transport service for isolated communities depends upon stable working conditions of its service providers, I submit that it is
default imperative that the relationships between the driver and operator and between driver and consumer is given serious consideration by this Committee.
default4.3.
default 
defaultThis is especially important given the ambitions of many in the public transport sector to see the taxi and
default private hire industry becomes more innovative and professional in order to provide demand-responsive services such as taxi-buses (as proposed by the National Association of Taxi Users).  For these ambitions to be realised the working conditions of private
default hire drivers have to be better protected.  When considering the role of taxis and private hire services in relation to transport provision for isolated communities, I recommend the Committee take a tripartite approach to industry relations that includes a
defaultll three key stakeholders; operator, consumer and driver.
default4.4.default 
defaultNeedless to say the benefits to Government of improving the working conditions of private hire drivers are numerous; reduced dependency upon welfare benefits, taxable income increases, a rise in ser
defaultvice levels and the speedier development of innovations – for example the environmentally friendly services that are popular in London.
default5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow the radio-rental business model works, the benefit it brings to private hire operators and its implications for consdefaultumers and the wider publicdefault5.1.
default 
defaultOperators do not receive income directly from the fares of their cash customers.
default  
defaultInstead, operators receive a fixed weekly 'radio-rent' in advance from each private hire driver in their fleet. Payment of the radio-rent enables 
defaultdrivers to receive jobs through a radio or digital despatch device connecting them to a vehicle dispatcher at the operator's base. Drivers retain all the fares that they are paid to them from the custom received through this radio or device.
default5.2.
default 
defaultUnder the radio-rental model, 
defaultthere is a natural incentive for operators to increase their radio-rental price or add further drivers to their fleet
default (in order to rent more radios) irrespective of the work load.  Over time, this 
defaultpractice
default defaultis often taken too f
defaultar leading to the work load of the fleet becoming diluted and private hire drivers experiencing a drop in the number of fares received.  Drivers can be added to an operators fleet without any additional cost to the operator since the driver will own the pr
defaultivate hire vehicle and arrange vehicle insuranc
defaulte cover. Therefore the radio-rental model removes any expansion cost or risk from the operator.
default5.3.
default 
defaultSeeking to retain the loyalty of their customers, operators have 
defaultan additional incentive to keep fares as low as 
defaultpossible
default. Of course, this is unusual for a commercial operation but it is only achieved in this instance because operators do not receive income directly from fares.
default5.4.
default 
defaultIn the case of the private hire industry very low fares effectively prevents both establis
defaulthed, conscientious operators lead by example and treat their drivers with greater dignity.  Fares are currently so low that established conscientious operators (that are not the dominant actor in the local market) would not be able to raise their fares hig
defaulth enough to guarantee the National Minimum Wage to their drivers without losing their entire customer base.
default A dominant actor within a radio-rental market would however be able to raise fares without being hurt commercially to the same degree as if a lesso
defaultr operator did so.  Because all other local operators are likely to retain low fares, and because there would be no direct short-term commercial benefit in financial terms, there is no clear incentive for a dominant operator to raise fares in this way. The
default only motivation for raising fares for a dominant operator would be to prevent a driver revolt, but given the power of a dominant operator over its own drivers and, critically, other local operators such a revolt from drivers is very unlikely. 
default5.5.
default 
defaultLow fares h
defaultave an additional benefit of establishing a higher barrier to entry for new operators to the market. Normally, new entrants to any market will compete with established companies by offering a more competitive service coupled with a reduced price – at least
default for the initial period of trading.  Normally, a reduced cost offers an incentive for potential clients to risk departing from their established service provider in order to test the service of a new and unproven competitor.  Since new competitors will not
default enjoy the same scale, levels of experience and range of services customers of its established rivals will enjoy, it is often very important for new entrants to be able to offer this reduced price.
default5.6.
default 
defaultIn deciding whether to change to an operator that is a new
default entrant drivers will only be attracted to a new company if their daily income exceeds that of their previous operator. If fares at the new operator are at market rates or slightly lower then this operator will need to provide more fares per day to attract
default drivers. This appears to be an impossible task for any new operator within a mature radio-rental market. To provide more fares per day the new operator requires not only a significant initial customer base but the concomitant fleet of vehicles to provide 
defaultthe flexibility and adequate level of service required to handle that sufficiently large customer base. This is very rarely achieved.  Since a new operator will have to ensure their prices remain at or below the local market rate inevitably means their dri
defaultvers will be working for well below the National Minimum Wage (see section 6).  Where the radio-rental model is prevalent, any improvements to the working conditions of drivers at even the most conscientious operator will therefore be marginal and potentia
defaultlly worse.
default5.7.
default 
defaultNot only are private hire drivers unprotected by trade unions and National Minimum Wage legislation they are also unprotected by the normal market mechanisms that would otherwise be able to assist them. If the structural complexion of the indust
defaultry in certain cities was not broken to such a degree the market would allow established, conscientious operators to behave differently and raise standards.  Again, if the market was not broken to such a degree, new operators acting as social entrepreneurs 
defaultcould also enter the market and improve the working conditions of drivers.  In short, it is impossible in most UK cities for conscientious operators or social entrepreneurs to improve the working conditions of private hire drivers when they are effectively
default forced to pay their drivers well below the National Minimum Wage for a 50 hour week.
default5.8.
default 
defaultWhen the implications of the radio-rental business model have reached maturity, consumers also benefit 
defaultfinancially 
defaultfrom under-priced fares.  In Leeds for example, a journ
defaultey shared between two people is often cheaper in a private hire vehicle rather than on a bus.  Consumers also enjoy an over supply of private hire vehicles which improves service response times.
default5.9.default 
defaultConsumers and private hire operators both benefit in the shor
defaultt term from this business model whilst private hire drivers are placed under significant financial pressures, often leading to financial servitude (see section 6). 
default Over the long term established operators benefit from reduced levels of competition and a g
defaultross imbalance of parity between themselves and drivers which enables operators to reap large commercial rewards.  Conversely, in the long term customers start to experience a dramatic reduction in the quality of service levels as a consequence of very low
default pay attracting only the lowest skilled workers. More broadly, road safety standards also diminish dramatically as drivers are forced into working 10-12 hours a day, six or seven days a week.
default6.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultImplications of the radio-rental business model for private hiredefault driversdefault6.1.
default 
defaultThere are two main implications of the radio-rental business model for private hire drivers. The first is level overheads drivers face every week, the second is the amount of time it takes to earn a living after settling these weekly overheads.
default6.2.
default 
defaultInitial research of local drivers indicates that, for a 50 hour week, average weekly overheads for a driver in Leeds can be as much as £420. The majority of this outlay is comprised of vehicle ownership/rental and insurance costs and the radio-rent which i
defaults all paid in advance to the operator every week. The most expensive option is to rent a vehicle, which combined with the radio-rent, can cost a private hire driver in Leeds £270 per week. The remaining outlay is for fuel and other costs that can total ove
defaultr £150 per week 
defaultdepending on the number of miles driven
default. Total weekly overheads for a private hire driver in Leeds can therefore be at least £420 per week.
default6.3.
default 
defaultDue to the high weekly overheads, low fare prices and a shortage of fares, drivers at a major privat
defaulte hire operator in Leeds can expect to earn as little as £2.00 an hour for a 50 hour week.
default6.4.
default 
defaultIn practice private hire drivers in Leeds typically have to work four days per week (without an income) to repay these weekly costs.  Once these overheads are paid, 
defaultaside from fuel costs, drivers are able to retain their income and so they seek to work as many hours as possible.  It is not uncommon for drivers in Leeds to work 12 hours a day for seven days a week.
default6.5.
default 
defaultDuring an economic downturn the two implications descr
defaultibed above are compounded by lower consumer demand and an increase in the number of drivers entering the sector, having lost their 
defaultjobs in other industries. Anecdotal evidence in Leeds suggests there are currently fewer fares available but more private hir
defaulte drivers. Thi
defaults further exacerbates the dilution of fares between drivers and effectively forces service and safety standards even lower as more experienced, higher skilled drivers migrate into other sectors, but more commonly, work even longer hours.  
default6.6.default 
defaultTh
defaulte consequences of long working hours and low pay go beyond individual drivers. There is also a significant effect upon driver's families and the safety of their customers and other road users. It may be considered useful to conduct further research into th
defaulte impact of extended working hours of private hire drivers upon the levels of road safety standards.
default7.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultOther models - The profit-share business modeldefault7.1.
default 
defaultThere are other business models that are actively used by private hire operators that I believe better resp
defaultect the relationship between operator, driver and consumer.
default7.2.
default 
defaultIn London a profit-share model is commonly used which means operators have a direct relationship with the price of their fares.  Like any other sector this places upward pressure upon prices which
default is balanced by consumer pressure and market competition.  
default7.3.
default 
defaultUnder the profit-share model the operator, in exchange for providing customers and a vehicle to the private hire driver, retains approximately 50% of the total fare income generated that week. Sin
defaultce income levels for the operator are the same irrespective of the number of drivers in its fleet, there is no incentive for the operator to increase the fleet size when the work load does not require it.
default7.4.default 
defaultUnder the profit-share model operators do not compe
defaultte primarily on the prices of fares, as they do with the radio-rental model. Instead, because operators have an interest in keeping fares as high as possible, they compete on customer service levels and innovation in order to demonstrate a competitive offe
defaultr.  This appears to be a more favourable model; drivers and operators enjoy a shared commercial interest (which better protects the financial interests of drivers) and consumers benefit from a higher quality service that does not rely upon the exploitation
default of drivers.
default8.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultConclusiondefault8.1.
default 
defaultUrban isolated communities rely upon private hire services for both business and leisure activities.  However the industry is riddled with labour exploitation which is unacceptable even if it does mean providing a very low cost serv
defaultice for the wider public and isolated communities such as low income groups.
default8.2.
default 
defaultThe radio-rental business model extensively employed in the private hire industry has a profound negative impact upon its drivers forcing many of them to work over 70 hours a week
default.  Under the radio-rental model customer service standards are substantially reduced, drivers are exploited, and whilst consumers enjoy low fares, public safety standards are compromised.
default8.3.
default 
defaultMuch can be done to improve the industry and better integrate it int
defaulto the public transport sector. In my view improving the industry so that it can provide a quality service to isolated and non-isolated communities alike can only be achieved when considering how to improve the relationships between all three key stakeholde
defaultrs; operators, consumers and drivers.
default8.4.
default 
defaultFor regulators, there are advantages to improving these key stakeholder relationships as mutual interests between the stakeholders improves standards thus requiring less regulatory control and enforcement action.
default8.5.
default 
defaultIf 
defaultregulators ignore the internal relationship between the operator and the driver then there is a much greater requirement for regulations, enforcement action and expenditure on safety and
default&#xa0;
defaultservice quality matters.  The ideal position for the government and r
defaultegulators is to encourage internal stakeholder relationships that are largely self-regulating.  This path provides a context for reducing friction within the industry and reducing the attendant regulatory costs which are otherwise required to resolve. Pres
defaultently the private hire sector contains an enormous amount of conflict built into its stakeholder relationships.  Even with a new regulatory framework that the Law Commission are currently developing the sector will continue to be difficult to regulate prop
defaulterly as key stakeholder relationships are broken, strongly opposing each other through an expression of their vastly divergent interests.  To ensure a stable, safe and equitable private hire market for the general public the interests of all parties are be
defaultst served through reforming the structures that allow for the necessary improvement of stakeholder relations.  This is particularly important for isolated communities since private hire drivers serving these communities are themselves highly likely to be i
defaultsolated and vulnerable.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default              
defaultMingeley v Pennock And Ivory t/a Amber Cars (2004), IRLR 373
default              
defaultR
defaultelated case - 
defaultStringfellows Restaur
defaultants v Quashie (2012) EWCA Civ 1735
default 
default              
defaultOperators do receive some direct income generated from account clients paying a premium fare but this represents only a small proportion of their income for most operators outside London.
default              
defaultApproximate calculations 
defaultestimate a fare rise of 50-80% (for most towns and cities outside of London and the South East) would be necessary for the National Minimum Wage to be met within a 50 hour week.
default1.1.
default 
default              
defaultDfT data sets should be able to assist with comparing the rate of involvemen
defaultt of private hire and taxi drivers in road collisions against the varying working conditions of drivers in different parts of the country - 
defaulthttp://road-collisions.dft.gov.uk/
default