              
defaultWritten evidence from Seascale Parish Council (TIC 039)default&#xa0;defaultParagraphdefaultCommentdefault from Seascale Parish Councildefault1.
defaultWhat is an ‘isolated community’?  Within Copeland Borough Council’s Local Development Framework (LDF) Core Strategy Seascale is defined as a ‘service centre’ and as such is considered appropriate for future development.  It has its own railway station, a r
defaultegular bus service, some access to community transport and demand-responsive options.  ‘Rural’ is not necessarily the same as ‘isolated’.  Seascale is a rural community but it has broader links with public transport than do some other communities in West C
defaultumbria.  These links may be far from perfect but they do exist.
default2.
defaultHow is a community’s relative isolation
default best measured?  There are three fundamental socio-economic criteria for its members: (a) the ability/inability to move in and out of the community for work and leisure; (b) the ability/inability to have goods and services (e.g. online shopping) delivered;
default (c) the reliance on permanent essential services and key amenities resident in the community.  The Transport Committee’s remit considers physical isolation, but an increasingly important interpretation of isolation is a reliable, efficient and cost-effect
defaultive online presence.
default3.
defaultThe lack of a Sunday rail service (from approximately 19:00 on Saturday to 06:50 on Monday) does render Seascale an isolated community in this period and it has long been argued that this has a detrimental impact on both local resi
defaultdents and holiday-makers.  The absence of a Sunday rail service means that accessing one of the region’s most popular tourist attractions (the Ravenglass &amp; Eskdale Railway) almost certainly requires private transport.  However, relatively traditional Sunda
defaulty trading patterns are observed in Seascale, with most businesses remaining closed.
default4.
defaultA prolonged period of severe weather could also render Seascale an isolated community.  Bad weather in winter 2012-13 disrupted essential grocery deliveries from the so
defaultuth.
default5.
defaultThe last half-century has seen an overwhelming bias towards ownership and use of the private car.  This has been to the detriment of public transport and, in particular, to the railway network.  The question of improving passenger transport does n
defaultot only concern the provision and funding of additional services, but also fundamental cultural issues of lifestyle, independence, flexibility and sense of community.  The Transport Committee’s five questions assume that additional passenger transport woul
defaultd be universally welcomed.  It is unlikely that additional services would encounter objection, particularly on a hypothetical level, but whether they would be comprehensively used is a slightly different matter.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default1
default of 1
default&#xa0;
default