&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultCalordefault Gas Ltd (HOT08)defaultEXECUTIVE SUMMARYdefault1.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultConsumption of energy for heat in the home is on a downward trend with promising new technologies offering
default further efficiency gains
default and the prospect of reducing household fuel bills whilst keeping us on course to our 2050 carbon emission targets and offering a measure of protection against power cuts post 2015.
default2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultGovernment, now joining the growing weight of scientific opinion and envir
defaultonmental campaigners, considers biomass not to be sustainable. Moreover, biomass emissions carry a social cost of £4343m in terms of premature death and extra morbidity. The downsides of biomass
default apply equally in domestic or industrial combustion.
default3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe susta
defaultinability criteria of biomass are weak, rely on the honesty box principle and 
defaulttake no account of carbon debt or emissions from indirect use of land change. They provide no safeguard against increased net carbon emissions.
default4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultTests to date on installed heat pu
defaultmps show m
defaultany 
defaultfailing 
defaultto qualify as renewable. 
default Failures would not count towards our 
defaultrenewables
default target and could either completely waste or forfeit subsidy. 
defaultMany 
defaultheat pumps
default,
default when installed
default,
default do not do what 
defaultthey 
defaultsay on the tin, and no amount of taxpayer’s 
defaultsubsidy can draw a veil over that.
default Air Source Heat Pumps emerge from independent testing as a bust technology undeserving of taxpayer support.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWhat pdefaultrogress is the Government mdefaultadefaultking in reducing demand for hdefaulteat?default1.1. 
defaultIn the past 10 years 
defaultthe
default average 
defaultCalor
default 
defaultcentral heating customer has reduced 
defaulthis or her
default fuel usage by over 20% on a weather adjusted basis. 
defaultThis is in line with the recent analysis published by the Office of National Statistics
default which covered
default natural gas demand in urban areas
default. 
defaultPerhaps
default deman
defaultd for heat has fallen because of better insulation standards
default and more efficient equipment
default, but it is hard to disentan
defaultgle this factor from energy price rises 
defaultdepressing consumption.
default1.2. 
defaultT
defaulthe good news is that gas technology still has an enormous amount to
default offer
default in maintaining this downward trend
default. For example, two thirds of properties still have older non-condensing boilers and therefore still have significant savings available at relatively low cost. We are also seeing a raft of exciting new technologies c
defaultoming on to the market which will further accelerate the decline in energy consumption and carbon emissions
default. These new technologies 
defaultcan be used in off gas grid areas 
defaultand are 
defaultable to utilise legacy heating systems such as radiators and 
defaultcirculating 
defaultpumps
default. 
defaultThese 
defaultinclude Flue Gas Heat Recovery, 
defaultmCHP
default (micro combined heat and power) and Gas Absorption Heat Pumps – a
defaultll
default 
defaultlow carbon or 
defaultrenewable gas technolog
defaulties
default which 
defaultcan 
defaultbe 
defaultreadily 
defaultretrofitted on to a home’s existing central heating system
default.
defaultWhat are the relative mdefaulterits of using gas to directly provide space heating compared to centralised electricity production plus domestic heat pumps?default defaultWhat are the lock in, costs and GHG savings from the promotion of different forms of domestic heating solutions?default2.1. The Energy N
defaultetworks Association in their report “Gas Future Scenario Project” (November 2010) stated: “There are credible and robust scenarios in which gas could play a major ongoing role in the GB energy mix while meeting both the 2050 carbon targets and the 2020 ren
defaultewable energy targets”. “Pathways with ongoing gas use could offer a cost-effective solution for a low-carbon transition relative to scenarios with higher levels of electrification.” The report shows potential savings of almost £700bn over the 2010 to 2050
default period – about £20,000 per household or £10,000 per person “with consequential benefits for consumers, the economy, and the competitiveness of GB industry”.  The report points out that the low-carbon technologies all, “Involve significant investment in ne
defaultw technology, with its associated risks” and concludes that, “There appears to be significant value in retaining the option for a ‘high gas’ future”. 
default              
default2.2. For urban areas, it points to the value of enjoying the sunk costs in the gas mains: “The costs of maintaining the existing gas transmission and distribution networks are relatively small in comparison to the other system costs associated with a low-c
defaultarbon transition. Together these findings suggest a compelling economic rationale for maintaining the operation of the GB gas transmission and distribution networks for the foreseeable future”. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3. Projects are underway to decarbonise gas (deploying 
defaultbiomethane
default or 
defaultbiopropane
default) but meanwhile we can make the fossil fuel work harder by deploying micro-generation – if decarbonised gas comes down the pipeline then lock-in disappears as a problem becaus
defaulte we are dealing with bridging technology rather than a temporary fix. 
defaultmCHP
default involves the use of gas to generate both heat and electricity. It is a low cost solution delivering secure low carbon electricity. 
defaultOne possible component of the domestic heating sc
defaultenarios contemplated in DECC’s “Pathways Analysis” is 
defaultmCHP
default – reaching up to 90% of the technology mix in one illustrated case, and with a maximum penetration of 36 million households by 2050. 
default&#xa0;
default2.4. 
defaultOwners of compliant 
defaultmCHP
default units can sell electricity back 
defaultto the grid. So, 
defaultmCHP
default will lower, not raise
default,
default household energy bills
default and could
default be an antidote to fuel poverty
default.
default&#xa0;
default2.5
default. 
defaultmCHP
default units are  compatible with existing grid infrastructure. What is more,
default 
defaultmCHP
default benefits security of supply because the electricity is gene
defaultrated at or near the point of use, and when it is needed. This obviates losses in transmission (accounting for about 7% of all power generated), reduces the demand for electricity from the grid and the need for investment in central generation and the tran
defaultsmission and distribution network
default, thus lessening the otherwise crippling cost of the energy strategy (estimated at £376bn by 2030
default1
default)
default. 
defaultmCHP
default 
defaultalso
default 
defaultenhances protection against the risk of power cuts occurring after 2015, since the majority of the electricity needed by a typical home will be generated on site, and 
defaultmCHP
default can support grid generation at times of peak demand. 
defaultIndeed, 
defaultmCHP
default tends to generate 
defaultmore power at times of peak demand (evenings and 
defaultw
defaultinters) and insofar as it is deployed will lessen the need to operate very expensive fossil-fuel peaking plant. 
default A financial benefit 
defaulthas been calculated of 6.2p/kWh of electricity generated from avoided cap
defaultacity, energy and emission costs provided there is widespread 
defaultmCHP
default deployment
default2
default.
default&#xa0;
default2.6
default. Significant reliance on fossil fuel capacity is dictated for decades to come to compensate for the intermittency of wind, and the slow modulation of nuclear (if indeed it
default can be financed and built in time to meet demand). It is this peaking and balancing fossil plant that 
defaultmCHP
default displaces so delivering carbon savings. As long as there is fossil plant in the grid 
defaultmCHP
default delivers carbon savings.
default&#xa0;
default2.7. 
defaultThe world energy scenario has changed almost beyond recognition in the last decade. Assumptions about “peak” oil and gas now look risible in light of the transformative effects of 
defaultunconventional oil and gas 
default on the US 
defaultenergy market and economy
default, and the US 
defaulthas also shown that it is perfectly possible to enjoy the economic growth as a result of this new cheap and secure supply whilst driving down carbon emissions overall. 
defaultmCHP
default can 
defaulthelp exploit this bounty with supreme efficiency.
default&#xa0;
defaultBiomass is deemed a key fueldefault for defaulthdefaulteat production from botdefaulth the cost and GHG perspective. default What should be done to ensure methods of calculating biomass GHG balance represent an accurate picture? There are sustainability guidelines for biomass, do these go far enough?default&#xa0;default3
default.1. 
defaultThere has 
defaultbeen a steady shift in attitude to the use of biomass within the scientific community, the European Commission, and now, detectably within the
default Government itself. The
default downsides of biomass in electricity generation or 
defaultin
default combustion in the home
default are shared
default: th
defaulte differences are mainly of scale, except that at the domestic level there is no 
defaultthird party 
defaultcontrol of emissions 
defaultthrough the stack.
default All too often the social cost of these emissions – in terms of early death and disease –
default is
default ignored. This social cost has b
defaulteen computed at £4343m by DECC
default3
default.
default3
default.
default2
default. 
defaultThe Chartered Institute of Water and Environmental Management recently commented: “The encouragement of biomass boilers in urban areas has added new sources of pollution, where there is often existing poor air quality…
defaultBurning…biomass emits 
defaultNOx
default and PM. The PM is largely composed of black carbon, which is now thought to be responsible for the cardiovascular health effects and premature mortality due to both short term (24 hour) and long term (annual) exposure. It is also 
defaultimportant with respect to climate change
default (NOTE: black carbon is a potent global warming agent, second only to CO
default2
default in its overall impact worldwide)
default. The current regulations on emissions from combustion plant of less than 50MW …are inadequate and for those 
defaultof less than 20MW, it is almost non-existent
default” (“Clearing the Air”, 
defaultJuly 2013).
default3.3.
default 
defaultThe Committee on the Medical Effects of Air Pollution estimated that the 2008 burden level of particulates cost an “
defaultassociated loss of total population life of 340,000 life
default-years…a greater burden than the mortality impacts of environmental tobacco smoke or road traffic accidents”
default4
default)
default. Remarkably, this figure is exactly the level of extra burden of mortality to have been inflicted on the 
defaultUK
default atmosphere by 2020 under the previous
default Government’s policy on biomass, with its target of 38TWh by that date. No wonder Government has 
defaultresiled
default from a specific target. The last Government was aware biomass boilers deteriorate as they age so proposed an annual MOT test on domestic biomass boiler
defaults – all mention of such an annual MOT test on boilers has since been dropped.
default&#xa0;
default3.4.
default 
defaultThere are growing doubts about the sustainability of biomass as a technology. The EEA Scientific Committee on Greenhouse Gas Accounting, 
defaultfor instance, states that the 
defaultassumption that burning biomass is carbon neutral is incorrect: “Using land to produce plants for energy typically means that this land is not producing plants for other purposes, including carbon otherwise sequestered.” If biomass production replaces fore
defaultsts, reduces forest stocks or forest growth, which would otherwise sequester more carbon, it can increase carbon concentrations net. The RSPB, Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace comment that DECC’s flawed emission accounting on biomass has led to a situat
defaultion where, “Burning whole trees in power stations would make global warming worse, undermining goals of reducing our greenhouse gases by 2050”.
default3.5. 
defaultUsing logged trees as a 
defaultbioenergy
default source – replacing fossil fuel – carries the risk of first increasing CO
default2
default emissions before reducing them. It could in fact take up to 100 years before emissions begin to decrease. Using crop residues or wood waste does not have this downside, or to a lesser extent. If felling were to increase to provide more energy through biom
defaultass, this could hinder rather than help achieving CO
default2
default targets. This is the main conclusion from the analysis ‘Climate effects of wood used for 
defaultbioenergy
default’ (august 2013), released by PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency in cooperation with 
defaultAlterra
default 
defaultWageningen
default UR.
default3.6
default. 
defaultThe Government 
defaultrecently made
default an announcement that after 2027 
defaultpayments to biomass conversions will end “in
default line with Government’s longer-
defaultterm sustainability objectives as set out in the 
defaultBioenergy
default Strategy”. Belatedly, HMG has realised that biomass is not the sustainable hero it purported 
defaultit to be. As Robert 
defaultHarrobin
default commented on the Today Programme on 17
defaultth
default July 2013: “Ed Davey told me that 
defaultthey do accept that this is not a sustainable solution to the 
defaultUK
default electricity p
defaultroblems
default”
default. 
defaultWhy the 2027 cut off? It’s just as unsustainable before as after that date.
default What is not sustainable for burning in 
defaultpower plants is not sustainable in domestic situation
defaults where the controls are effectively “non-existent”.
default&#xa0;
default3.7
default. 
defaultWe are not satisfied that the proposed sustainability criteria are sufficiently demanding. Wastes and residues are not subject to sustainability criteria. In theory, giving waste a free pass appear
defaults appealing, but what is “waste” and what are “residues”? The OFGEM guidance is remarkably vague and clearly capable of being exploited: “
defaultIt is not possible to lay down definitive or absolute rules as to when particular materials will be considered as 
defaultwaste materials or not”. We fear that this complexity of definition could provide the unscrupulous with a loophole to exploit.
default&#xa0;
default3.8
default. 
defaultOFGEM effectively points to the weakness of the process of operators verifying the information they supply on 
defaultsustainability: “Under the Orders, operators of generating stations for solid and gaseous biomass are not required to verify the information they provide to us in order to be eligible for ROCs”.
default Reporting of sustainability criteria appears to rely too much
default on the honesty box principle, particularly in the context of “weak governance structures” identified in the “
defaultReport from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on sustainability requirements for the use of solid and gaseous biomass sour
defaultces in electricity, heating and cooling” (2010).
default3.9
default. The Government issued new biomass sustainability standards on 22
defaultnd
default August 2013.  The Chief Scientist at 
defaultGreenpaece
default commented, 
default“The loopholes in these sustainability standards are big enough to d
defaultrive a l
defaultogging truck through...
defaultThe government has ignored the latest scientific research and 
defaultproduced standards that will take a potentially sustainable industry and transform it into one more way to 
defaultgreen
defaultwash
default environmental destruction”
default5
default. 
defaultKeith Richter, speaking 
defaultfor Friends of the Earth said, "It is incomprehensible 
defaultthat under the new rules the burning of trees in power stations will be counted as "carbon neutral" despite the preliminary results of DECC's own research showing that it can be worse for the climate t
defaulthan burning coal
default”
default5
default. Other critics pointed out that emissions from indirect land use change and carbon debt received no consideration in the new standards. We conclude that in answer to the Committee’s question of whether the biomass sustainability criteria
default go far enough is a resounding, “NO”.
default&#xa0;defaultWhy does the RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully?default&#xa0;
default4
default.1. 
defaultIt’s not the fault of the RHI, but the fault of the pumps as installed. Leaving aside questions of their e
defaultxpense to install
default, 
defaultand 
defaultthe
default disruptiveness of their installation, all too often they do not work properly. 
defaultA study of installed heat pump performance published by the Energy Saving Trust on the 8
defaultth
default September 2010 – “
defaultGetting Warmer: a field trial of heat pumps”
default revealed that the actu
defaultal performance of heat pumps installed in the UK was surprisingly poor. The study was financed by the heat pump industry and based on a sample of sites where pumps had been installed pre-selected by the industry. The study showed that only 1 of the 22 prop
defaulterties with Ground Source Heat Pumps (GSHPs) achieved the implicit minimum EU Directive 
defaultCoP
default of 3
default, and only 9 of the 47 sites with ASHPs achieved the standard. Similar results prevailed in the 
defaultRowntree
default Foundation study in 
defaultYork
default. The Association for the Conse
defaultrvation of Energy calculates C
defaulto
defaultefficients of Performance for Air Source Heat Pumps from international data of between 2.15 and 2.7. On that basis, they all fail the renewable test.
default4
default.2. 
defaultDECC is well aware of the problem: “We are aware that systems 
defaultinstalled in the past have not always worked as well as they should” (Para. 199, DECC Consultation on the RHI, 20
defaultth
default September 2012) and again: “It is a common 
defaultfeature in field trials and assessments that there is a significant gap between expected and actu
defaultal performance” (
defaultpara
default. 1.23, 
defaultMicrogeneration
default Strategy Consultation, DECC, 22
defaultnd
default Dec, 2010). DECC is currently monitoring 150 heat pumps and preliminary results show that most heat pumps operating on a 
defaultmild
default Spring day were achieving below the required perfor
defaultmance levels - some significantly below. Far from backing a winning horse, DECC is backing a flop but it has been coy in admitting it, confining itself so far to admit: “We think it is likely that on average the results will still be a long way off the hig
defaulth-performing systems that are consistently being measured in Germany”. 
default&#xa0;
default4.3. 
defaultThe Energy Savings Trust has now published Phase 2 of its testing on pumps (“The Heat is On”, May 2013). The bulk of this work involved a series of interventions on 32 of the fai
defaultling Phase 1 sites over a three year period. In 12 cases the “interventions were “major”. In 10 cases, the interventions involved the complete replacement of the pump systems. Even with all this no doubt expensive intervention: “Some sites did not improve,
default even with major and medium interventions”. The deficiency in performance was especially marked for ASHPs with 
default6
default out of 15 
defaultstill 
defaultfailing to make the 
defaultrenewable 
defaultgrade. From this we deduce that there is no case for continued taxpayer subsidy to ASHPs since ev
defaulten after extensive and costly intervention by experts 
defaultan unacceptable proportion
default could not be made to work properly. They would be ruled out as renewable by the EU and energy they generate would not count towards the 
defaultUK
default’s renewable targets. The average per
defaultformance of ASHPs was under the bar of being counted as renewable.
default4.4. 
defaultTo be fair, after all this desperate effort over three years, most GSHPs did work properly. How much all this extensive and expensive remediation would cost, and who would bear that co
defaultst – the installer or the householder – is a question for bitter experience in the market, but we draw a strong 
defaultconclusion from this that type-rating technology to a standard is a long way from actual installed performance. Let the buyer beware – and let t
defaulthe taxpayer beware of pouring subsidy into a technology that does not make the grade. Government should pay out subsidy only on those pumps tested as having delivered
default to minimum performance standards
default after installation.
default4.5. 
defaultThese conclusions echo other studies. Johnson, for instance,  in 
defaultEnergy Policy
default, 2011, vol. 39, issue 3, pages 1369-1381 finds that at UK efficiencies heat-pump footprints (in kg CO2e emitted pe
defaultr kWh delivered) are comparable or higher than footprints of gaseous fuels used in heating. Compared with fossil fuel gas they don’t save carbon.
default4.6. 
defaultThe Green Alliance  lobby 
defaultin favour
default of heat pumps but even they have admitted, “Heat pumps have performed
default badly in the UK…UK heat pumps have suffered from poor quality technology…bad installation…incorrect use…high running costs…Despite poor installations, heat pump installers aren’t being struck off for malpractice (“Switching the UK onto heat pumps”, 29
defaultth
default M
defaultay 2013)”. Time after time he
defaultat pumps simply do not do what they say 
defaulton the tin. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default