&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultPeter G Rayner
default (SLC 003)
default&#xa0;
default1.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe have many 
defaultyears’ experience
default of Level Crossing design, maintenance and operation and we have both given evidence at a number of Inquiries 
defaultconcerning
default rail safety.  
defaultNotably
default Lord Cullens Inquiries into the Paddington Accident and 
defaultProfessor
default Uff’s Inquiry into the Southall train crash, an
defaultd many others.  Additionally have 
defaultchaired or
default been members of countless Inquiries into railway accidents.  Our CV’s are available if required.
default1.2 We are offering this evidence because we have been involved in two recent accidents which        concern level
default crossing operation.  In addition we expressed concerns regarding the safety of a level 
defaultcrossing
default in Nottingham in a detailed private correspondence with the Office of Rail Regulation (ORR) which correspondence others chose to put in the public domain.
default1.3 
defaultWe are aware reference to our involvement has been mentioned by the Union TSSA in a  written submission from the General Secretary Manuel Cortes
default.  Also that our correspondence with the ORR has been forwarded to the Rail Accident and Inquiry Bureau (RAIB) i
defaultn connection with yet another Level Crossing Incident.
default1.4 It should be known we have not written this submission on behalf of nor in collusion with any other party and do so only in the interests of railway safety.
default&#xa0;
default default2.1default 
defaultAre current safety measures at Level Crossings adequate?  How should they be improved?default2.1.1 
defaultThe regulations presently in place for signalled level crossings of various specified types is adequate.  The position could be improved by a review to ensure all crossings are in fact signalled 
defaultin accordance with the regulations
default and that 
defaultthe required 
defaultelec
defaulttrical or mechanical locking is in place.
default&#xa0;
default2.1.2 Examples exist, notably illustrated by the Moreton on Lugg
default accident where adequate protection was not in place.  This is a key issue and our concern is the culture that is now developing in the railway industry.
default&#xa0;
default2.1.3 
defaultFollowing the Clapham Accident
default on 12
defaultth
default Dec 1988 Antony Hidden QC made recommendations that were
default accepted by the industry.  One of the most important was No 50 which stated:  
default“BR
default shall ensure that the organisational framework exists to prevent commercial considerations of a business led railway from compromising safety”
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is our view that commercia
defaultl considerations surrounding the installation of Approach Locking, a standard procedure, prevented
default that safe system being applied 
defaultd
defaultespite knowledge within the industry that it was missing.
default2.2 defaultIn addition to Bridges and underpasses what other cost effectivdefaulte measures can be introduced to replace or improve safety at Level Crossings?default2.2.1 
defaultThe safety of footpath crossings remains an area of concern.  Modern trains are faster and qu
defaultiet
defaulter as investment takes place in new rolling stock.  Commercial consideration
defaults must not inhibit the provision of
default Red
default/
default Green
default warning lights and audible warnings 
defaultbeing provided.  Complaints of noise from local residents should not result in audible warnings being reduced.
default&#xa0;
default2.2.2 In the case of Bayles and Wylies Crossing on Nottingham
default Tramway, due to public complaints and indeed commercial considerations a contrived Risk Assessment allowed a deeply flawed arrangement to be put in place.
default&#xa0;
default2.2.3 Elsewhere on the Tramway
default,
default 
defaultc
defaultrossings have been dealt with correctly and safely.  This Crossing
default could have remain
defaulted 
default a crossing, provided it 
defaultwas
default correctly signed and installed.
default&#xa0;
default2.2.4 The correspondence surrounding this case is referred to in 1.2 of this evidence.  (We assume the Committee has the correspondence from others.)
default&#xa0;
default2.3 defaultHow should expendidefaultture on improving safety at level crossings be prioritidefaultseddefault in relation to other demands on the rail budget?default2.3.1 We have no views to express on this difficult issue other than to acknowledge the problem and be thankful that we no longer have to address it
default.  However the situation might be improved if the costs of improving or removing level crossings could be shared by road budgets if the net effect of bridges or underpasses reflected improvements to vehicle and pedestrian flows.
default2.3.2 It might be possible 
defaultfor the provision of basic safety interlockings to be installed in a less costly way by not using expensive high technology solutions.
default2.3.3 Too often assessments for simple procedures produce prohibitive costs to the overall detriment
default of a safe railway.  However, to attempt to now “turn the clock back” is to expose oneself to criticism and being “out of touch”.
default2.4 defaultIs Network Rail giving sufficient priority at level crossings?default2.4.1 
defaultFirstly we accept the historical practices and acknowledge Level Crossings for pedestrians in particular are a difficult area because custom and practice, design and installation has grown up over more than 100 years.  Thus an arrangement in one part of th
defaulte country is different from that in another location particularly with methods of locking wicket gates and other devices.
default2.4.2 The accident at Elsenham in 2005 and more recent examples indicate there is a need for the safe bringing together of systems to 
defaultensure safety is paramount.  The Elsenham case points to a cost cutting 
defaultexercise
default in that only one side of the line was it possible to purchase 
defaulttickets.  Thus the children crossed the line 
defaultto purchase tickets before boarding the train
default 
defaultresulting in their dea
defaultth.
default2.4.3 An in house review of different geographical locations, the history and position of level crossings in those different locations with a view to best procedure would be sensible.
default2.4.4 Network Rail we believe is addressing this problem, details ar
defaulte not 
defaultknown
default to us but we would not 
defaultrecommend the employment of Consultants.  Expertise exists within Network Rail to address the issue which in view 
defaulto
defaultf the different types in existence is a difficult one to address.
default2.4.5 In this context we believe the pre
defaultsent risks model used by the Industry (ORR and NR) called ACRAM (All Level Crossing Risk Model) is flawed in that it covers in great detail road and pedestrian user but pays little attention to Rail levels of traffic, frequency and speed of trains.
default2.5 defaultIs defaultGovernment policy and regulatory action by the Office of Rail Regulation (ORR) in relation to safety and level crossings adequate?  What more should the Government and ORR do?default2.5.1 Care must be taken to ensure there is clear water between the Engineers of
default similar professions employed within each organisation.
default2.5.2 One of the problems arising more and more is the lessening of the role of Railway Operator.  The Engineering culture is paramount and it has been forgotten that traditionally railway safety was 
defaultvested in the Superintendent of the Line, latterly known as the Chief Operating Manager, a qualified operator with the equivalent knowledge comparable with the ticket of a Master Mariner at sea.
default2.5.3 That office had to work with three engi
defaultneering disci
defaultpli
defaultnes, Mechanical and Electrical Engineers, Civil Engineers and Signalling Engineers, all of whom are different and equally important.
default2.5.4 
defaultThat culture has to a great extent has been lost
default.  For example the decision not to provide vital interlocking at More
defaultton on Lugg was taken without any discussions with railway operating experts.  It was also taken without any detailed knowledge on the risks of human error.
default  
defaultWe believe both organisations 
defaulti.e.
default ORR and NR are fit for purpose and have difficult but different
default tasks.
default2.5.5 It is our view
default that operating expertise should reside within NR and not be left to the ORR to pick up.  Historically the industry 
defaultprided itself in its professionalism and felt shame if found wanting  
defaultby the Railway Inspectorate, the predecess
defaultors of the ORR.
default default2.6 defaultHow should the defaultlegislation governingdefault level crossings be updated?default2.6.1 
defaultThere is
default no need for further legislation 
defaultunless
default it is thought extra powers should be given to ensure land owners give up little used farm crossings if sensible al
defaultternative routes exist for them to use their land.  Many of these crossings date back to the late nineteenth century.
default2.7 defaultHow should public awareness of safety at level crossings be improved?default2.7.1 
defaultOn-going
default publicity such as school visits, posters, adverts
default 
defaultetc.
default and perhaps television campaigns regarding reckless motoring.
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default