&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Forever Fuels Ltd (HOT11)defaultForever Fuels (FF) is a leading supplier of high-grade wood pellets to end users in the UK. We are one of four suppliers to have achieved accreditation as a trader under the European wood-pellet accr
defaulteditation scheme, ENplus. We have a national network of a dozen depots and 20 specialist trucks dedicated to the distribution and blown delivery of sustainable, virgin-fibre, A1-grade wood pellets. We have been leading the market for specialist blown deliv
defaulteries
default of wood pellets
default to continental standards since 2007.
defaultForever Fuels is part of the Summerleaze (SLZ) group. SLZ has been investing in renewables for over 30 years. We have a successful track record of identifying immature technologies with genuine com
defaultmercial potential, and of bringing them to profitable maturity. We have been actively involved in policy since before the privatisation of the CEGB, both in our own right and as founder members of organisations such as the Association of Independent Electr
defaulticity Producers (predecessor of the AEP and EnergyUK) and of Green Power Producers (which laid the foundations for the establishment of the Renewable Power Association, later to become the Renewable Energy Association).
defaultI chair the Renewable Energy Associa
defaulttion’s 
default(REA’s) 
defaultBiomass Heat group, but the following submission is 
defaulton behalf 
defaultof Forever Fuels, and does not 
defaultrepresent the views of the REA 
defaultBiomass Heat 
defaultgroup.
defaultThese factors may not be coincidental. Reductions in demand 
defaultseem to
default be largely
default the unintended consequence of energy policies that (a) embed the competitive advantages (and pricing power) of the Big Six energy companies, and (b) impose costs on customers that are not always proportionate to the benefit. 
defaultDemand reductions appear to h
defaultave less to do with the intended effects of government policy. The increase in the number of deaths resulting from cold weather suggests that the reduction in demand is attributable less to improvements in efficiency than to reductions in comfort, thanks t
defaulto increasing discrepancies between costs and many people’s ability to pay.
default The Government may not want to take credit for this reduction in demand.
defaultThe Government’s intended approach can be characterised as “supply-push”, while the unintended effect can be
default characterised as “demand-pull”. 
defaultD
defaultemand
default reduction through “supply-push” is like pushing on a piece of string. One should expect a higher standard to be demanded if efficiency improvements are commissioned by the person that buys the energy than if they are
default installed to meet the targets of the company that sells the energy. 
default“Demand-pull” driven by high energy prices should result in less of a Rebound Effect, than “supply-push” driven by 
defaultredistribut
defaulted costs of installation.
defaultIf “demand-pull” were the deliberat
defaulte result of government policy to internalise externalities through energy taxes (e.g. carbon taxes and fossil-fuel taxes, Scandinavian-style), the Government would have a substantial source of revenue with which to assist the most vulnerable households and
default to cut taxes that create a greater drag on the economy (e.g. taxes on employment and productivity). 
defaultIt would also encourage the most cost-effective responses
default to the price incentive in each circumstance, whereas the Government’s approach of targeted subsid
defaulty is necessitated largely by their desire to encourage projects that are currently less cost-effective.
defaultUnintentional “demand-pull” combined with intentional “supply-pus
defaulth” is the worst of all worlds. H
defaultigh prices go partly to subsidising uneconomic technolo
defaultgies and partly to 
defaultincreased profits for the energy oligopoly.
default Customers
default and
default taxpayers
default 
defaultsee lit
defaulttle gain to accompany the pain, and neither do businesses who are not allied to the Big Six.
defaultSee above. The wrong kind of progress, from the wrong kind of policy.
defaultUnlike the biomass power industry, the biomass heat industry provisionally supports DECC’s efforts to look more closely at the potential impacts of increased demand for biomass, and the associated intensification of production. DECC are asking 
defaultlegitimate questions, and need assistance from the renewables and forestry industries, to make the assumptions in their models as realistic as possible. 
defaultThat engagement is at an early stage. 
defaultO
defaultn 
defaultthe basis of 
defaulta recent presentation, DECC’s Biomass Emissions 
defaultand Counterfactuals
default (BEaC)
default model needs ignificant refinements in the embedded assumptions. Forever Fuels looks forward to assisting that refinement, and 
defaultwill encourage other members of the industry to do the same.
defaultNevertheless, the outline is clear, even i
defaultf the detail is not. Wood is a scarce resource. 
defaultThere is a limit to the amount that can be produced sustainably. Competing 
defaultdemand
default for that sustainable resource mean
defaults
default that an increased use for biomass may result in reduced availability for other uses.
default 
defaultInte
defaultnsification of production to increase the 
defaultavailable resource may have significant consequences for 
defaultthe carbon stock in the short- to medium-term (known as the “carbon debt” problem).
defaultIt is important to understand that the often-encountered, simplistic expl
defaultanation of the “carbon debt” problem is simply wrong. DECC’s
default BEaC model is looking into the
default genuine issue rather than the simplistic fallacy. Distinguishing between the fallacy and the genuine issue has significant implications for policy.
defaultThe fallacy
default compares the carbon released by burning the biomass harvested from an area with the amount of carbon that is absorbed by regrowth on that area
default. 
defaultBy this comparison
default, the concentration of carbon in the atmosphere 
defaultmay be
default increased
default in the medium-term
default. If we ar
defaulte 
defaultworried about climate-change tipping points
default, then the short-term increase
default appears significant.
defaultThe fallacy lies in treating this on a temporal rather than a spatial basis. The argument assumes that only the trees that regrow on the felled land will absor
defaultb the carbon that is emitted initially. That is not how forestry works. Forests are harvested in rotation. If the rotation is at a sustainable rate, the amount of carbon released from the harvested land each year is equal to the amount of carbon absorbed b
defaulty the rest of the land that is left to grow that year. There is no short-term increase unless the forest is harvested unsustainably.
defaultDECC’s BEaC model 
defaultconsiders a more subtle question: what 
defaultif the rate of harvesting is increased to meet an increased demand
default for biomass? The model relies 
defaulton work that 
defaultindicates that this can result in a 
defaultcarbon
default increase in 
defaultthe atmosphere and reduction o
defaultn the land. In effect, accelerated harvesting increases the carbon footprint of the marginal volume of biomass that is produced
default through the acceleration. 
defaultI
defaultn cases of strong acceleration,
default this increase 
defaultmay be
default so significant that 
defaultthis marginal volume cannot be considered sustainable from a carbon perspective.
defaultThe significance of the distinction between th
defaulte genuine and fallacious iss
defaultue
default is that the fallacy could imply that there is a problem with all biomass that is not produced on short rotation, whereas understanding the genuine issue clarifies that the problem is with the marginal volume that might be produced through intensificatio
defaultn above the sustainable rate of production. Under the fallacy, shortening the rotation cycle reduces the problem. 
defaultIn reality
default, shortening the rotation cycle 
defaultcan be
default the cause of the problem.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe support DECC’s efforts to refine the Government’s sustainability considerations. 
defaultT
defaulthis work should be carried out 
defaultand used scientifically
default, and not mis-used to justify 
defaultfalse generalisations
default, as some environmental NGOs have done.
defaultThe greatest
default (per
defaulthaps insuperable) challenge for
default DECC’s BEaC model, is to move 
defaultfrom testing scenarios
default to
default quantifying
default the sc
defaultal
defaulte and probability of those scenarios. Without that, the model is primarily of illustrative value
default.
defaultThe most significant factor highlighted by BEaC th
defaultat may need incorporating into sustainability guidelines, is the question of “carbon debt”. This could be incorporated by 
defaultasking forest managers to supply three pieces of information annually for the area of land under their management:
defaultThis information should be easily accessible to forest managers. It allow
defaults
default for simple calculation of the real “carbon debt” (i.e. calculated on a spati
defaultal rather than a temporal basis). This would also broadly take account of the “counterfactual use” issue, by allowing the benefits of non-energy uses to be taken into account in the calculation.
defaultWe have put this suggestion to DECC and look forward to 
defaultcontinuing the discussion.
defaultLocal air quality rules are the appropriate way to deal with the varying circumstances 
defaultagainst which emissions have to be considered. The failure of some urban areas to meet air quality limits, when there are few biomass boilers or CHP units in those areas, demonstrates that the problem lies elsewhere, particularly with vehicle emissions.
defaultHe
defaultat is an inherently local product. Distribution losses are too great to transport heat over long distances. It is also an on-demand product
default. S
defaulttorage losses limit the length of time that it is practical to store heat.
defaultSome people would like to work round th
defaultis, and the air-quality issues, by using electricity to transport the energy used to produce heat. This ignores the many ways in which electricity is an unsuitable heating fuel.
defaultThe solution is to use the appropriate technology in the appropriate location to produce combined heat and power
default 
defaultin a way that ha
defaults acceptable impacts on air quality. 
defaultSome
default 
defaultobjections to CHP could be countered by combining CHP, low-temperature district heating, and basic heat pumps to upgrade the distributed heat.
defaultDirect gas heating is a superior option to centralised generation and heat pumps, for the reasons explained above.
defaultBecau
defaultse the incentives
default are skewed
default to disadvantage them. The cost of installing CHP and district heating has to be recovered from the value of the heat. It has been UK government policy for decades to keep heat as cheap as possible (e.g. special VAT rates and pr
defaultofligate use of our North-Sea gas reserves). There is therefore little value in efficiency.
defaultDon’t promote different forms of domestic heating s
defaultolutions. Internalise the externalities and let the market decide which forms are most suitable in each circumstance. The cost of any government winner-picking is economic inefficiency and capital destruction. Scrap most of our energy interventions, and re
defaultplace them with a carbon tax
default and
default fossil-fuel tax.
defaultNo. The government should take fewer specific actions across the board. It is doing quite enough damage already.
defaultBecause heat pumps are not a suitable technology for the majority of heating requirements in the UK. We have an inefficient stock 
defaultof buildings 
default(
defaultbecause heat is cheap
default)
default. Heat pumps are primarily suitable
default for high-efficiency new-build properties, and we don’t build enough new buildings to a suitable standard. 
defaultT
defaulthe majority of our properties for the next 50 years
default will not be suitable for heat pumps
default.
defaultThere are also significant questions about their real-world
default as opposed to their theoretical efficiency.
defaultWe still don’t know enough of the details, in particular the budget and the budget-control mechanism. The sector has by far the largest potential, so
default we must expect that efforts will be made to const
defaultrain that potential through “idiosyncrasies
default” in the implementation.
defaultThermal storage is not a useful method to balance energy demand annually. The cost of a system that would buffer heat without excessive losses for a week, let alone a year, would far exce
defaulted the benefits of trying to do so.
defaultMany properties already use diurnal thermal storage. Straightforward engineering requirements drive its deployment wherever the heat-source cannot be switched on and off immediately. All that the government need do addit
defaultionally is to remove the market-skewing mechanisms that keep the value of heat relatively low compared to other forms of energy, so that larger capacity buffers may be justified where they improve the overall efficiency of the heating system.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/thousands-of-unexplained-and-unexpected-deaths-among-elderly-revealed-in-leaked-government-analysis-8731985.html
default Energy &amp; Climate Change Committee, 
default5
defaultth
default Report - Energy Prices, Profits and Poverty
default (July 2013)
default DECC, 
defaultEnergy Consumption in the UK
default (July 2013), 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/energy-consumption-in-the-uk
default 
defaulthttp://www.cityam.com/article/isn-t-recovery-we-expected-we-shouldn-t-write-it-entirely
default &amp; 
defaulthttp://www.themanufacturer.com/articles/g
defaultrowth-forecasts-raised-but-manufacturing-will-still-shrink-in-2013/
default 
defaulthttp://www.building.co.uk/news/signed-green-deal-plans-rise-to-36/5058061.article
default &amp; 
defaulthttp://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-23766117
default 
defaulthttp://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/energy/1
default0200859/ScottishPower-blames-government-energy-efficiency-schemes-for-rising-costs.html
default 
defaulthttp://www.cityam.com/article/pensions-being-crushed-low-interest-rates
default This is a complex factor, because increased production of wood for other uses may increase t
defaulthe resource available for biomass, because of the increased availability of by-product. The reverse (reduced production for other uses resulting in reduced resource for biomass) can also occur, but does not always apply. 
default&#xa0;
defaultReduced demand for other uses may make an increased proportion of the sustainable wood resource available for biomass without adverse consequences in other industries. It may be difficult to distinguish whether reduced volumes in other uses are because of 
defaultdisplacement by biomass or because of a natural reduction in demand (e.g. a permanent reduction in demand for pulp because of the replacement of some paper by electronic documents). 
default&#xa0;
defaultWould the alternative uses have been of greater social and environmental
default benefit than the use of the resource for energy? Perhaps the wood 
defaultcould
default have been used for a purpose that would have a significant environmental benefit (e.g. for production of particleboard that displaces concrete and steel), but that does not mean that 
defaultit 
defaultwould
default have been used for that purpose. Quantifying the proportion of biomass that would otherwise have been used for particleboard, and the proportion of that particleboard that would have displaced concrete and steel is probably impossible. It involves
default the complex relations of supply, demand, prices and elasticities across many products and several industries and unpredictable perturbations in those relations. These are probably not computable (see e.g. the work of Prof. Velupillai on computable economi
defaultcs) and are certainly not static. Rather, they have to be continuously discovered in a market. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThat is another reason why it is important to internalise externalities rather than to subsidise technologies on the basis of estimated need and subjective as
defaultsessment of merit and potential. With internalised externalities and no other subsidies, the resource can be allocated efficiently by markets. If the market is distorted by subsidies that exceed the value of the externalities, the resource will be allocate
defaultd inefficiently by markets.
default This is complex. On land without a substantial land-based carbon stock and where displacing the existing use will not have significant counterfactual consequences, planting short-rotation energy crops can have a strong carbon 
defaultbenefit. The problem occurs with shortening the rotation on land where there is a significant land-based carbon stock (e.g. a forest).
default&#xa0;
defaultThis complexity can produce counter-intuitive conclusions. One conclusion that has surprised the industry is that bringi
defaultng unmanaged broadleaf forests into active management has a worse carbon footprint than burning coal. This was a major plank of the Government and the Forestry Commission’s plan to increase biomass production in the UK.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe reason is that many common broa
defaultdleaf species have long natural lifecycles (hundreds of years). Established broadleaf forests embody a substantial stock of carbon, and their sustainable rate of production is a slow harvesting cycle (a fraction of a percent of the resource each year).
default&#xa0;
defaultSo
defaultftwoods generally regrow relatively fast and have a relatively short lifecycle (depending on the location and climate). They will tend to die or be vulnerable to wind-blow once they reach a relatively young age of maturity. Their sustainable harvesting cyc
defaultle is therefore measured in decades, as opposed to centuries for many broadleafs. That (and the greater suitability of the product for certain purposes such as pulp) is why softwoods tend to be planted in the “factory forests” that produce most of our wood
default products.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis is not the only reason why the plan was a mistake. The Government and the Forestry Commission also misunderstood what many of the private owners of those forests wanted from their properties, and their willingness to convert them into biom
defaultass factories. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAlthough they identified the wrong resource, that does not mean that the potential for biomass is limited. It means that it needs to come from more sustainable sources, e.g. softwood plantations. The native UK resource of sustainable bioma
defaultss is probably less than estimated by the Government, but (a) it is not insignificant, and (b) there is more potential for imports of sustainable biomass for the heat market than the Government had allowed. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is no reason why heat should use only nat
defaultive biomass and imports should be reserved for power-generation. The conversion efficiency of heat production is so much better than the conversion efficiency of power production that the carbon footprint of imported biomass will be significantly lower if 
defaultused for heat than for power. In some cases, fuel that is not sustainable for power is sustainable for heat, because of the difference in the conversion efficiencies.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.businessgreen.com/bg/analysis/2286031/decc-scientist-takes-green-groups-to-
defaulttask-over-biomass-claims
default