&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultJenny defaultE defaultMarsden (WSC025)default1. Backgrounddefault:default I work as a registered Healthcare scientist 
defaultwithin 
defaulta Radiation
default Physics
default department supporting Oncology and Radiotherapy Services
default. 
defaultI 
defaultam aware that my professional body is also preparing a response to this consultation
default but
default 
defaultI would like
default 
defaultto take this 
defaultopportunity
default to submit evidence because it affects me directly
default at this very moment
default. 
defaultI recently started a family and, up until then, progressed through my 
defaultSTEM 
defaultcareer
default for over 15 years
default with the minimum 
defaultof 
defaultgender related issues.
default I truly believed that there we
defaultre no boundaries for women carving out a career in science.
default The
default next step for me would be a 
defaultmore senior role
default,
default such as a 
defaultdepartment d
defaulteputy or even leading a small department. Higher study in the form 
defaultof a 
defaultspecialised
default 
defaultPh
defaultD is another option.
default2
default. 
defaultHowever, I am 
defaultnow acutely aware
default of the gender issues facing me
default a
defaults a new mother
default in the workplace. 
defaultI
defaultt appears I
default have a stark choice between promotion and spending time in the week with my children.
default 
defaultThe two 
defaultappear
default mutually exclusive at the moment 
defaultwhilst
default my children are young
default and 
defaultparticularly as 
defaultI have chosen to breastfeed
default. I
defaultt
default is very difficult to 
defaultdemonstrate
default dedication to
defaultwards
default work
default 
defaultto managers,
default in terms of working long 
defaultnon standard 
defaulthours
default,
default as well as to the family.
default3
default. 
defaultWhy do numbers of women in STEM acade
defaultmic careers decline further up the career ladder?
default 
defaultI present my 
defaultthoughts and 
defaultexperiences
default 
defaultto the committee in the hope that it will encourage discussion on some of the issues I have been exploring whilst trying to resolve my own personal question; Do I want 
defaultto be a Scientist in a very Senior Role?
default 
default&#xa0;
default4default.default Executive defaultSummarydefault:
default5default. defaultDiscussion: defaultIt is generally assumed that women in science all want to achieve the highest position they can. 
defaultI would like to dispute this claim. Women have to think very carefully about the choice they make when perusing senior roles and weigh up a number o
defaultf different conflicting demands. I expect I am one of the women in 
defaultthe
default statistics who have fai
defaultled to take up
default a top role. My 
defaultchoice 
defaultnow 
defaultis to continue in my current role, in effect halting my career rise. It is less of a ‘leaky pipe’ and more of a ‘boggy hill climb’ akin to the ‘sticky floor’ which many other career women face in other professions.
default Some women jus
defaultt prefer the view from the level they have reached!
default6
default. 
defaultGirls
default entering 
defaultthe world of work are 
defaultgetting married or forming long term relationships
default and having children later. Women who have reached a reasonable position are older and may care for both children and parents
default.
default 
defaultOne advantage of settling down later is that women may be receiving 
defaulthigher salaries, but that in turn may present a problem because they may well become the main breadwinner for the household. I
defaultf the woman’s job is the main or only source of family income
default, the risk of pursuing high roles by moving around the country on 
defaultcon
defaultsecutive 
defaultshort term contracts or taking time out to study to further advance may be perceived as far too high.
default 
defaultJob security at the moment is also in question so many people are looking to 
defaultstabilise
default their 
defaultwork lives
default rather than move on to temporary or short
default fixed term contracts. This would have been a way of progressing up the career ladder in previous years, or when there were no other responsibilities to consider except for oneself. Mobility to follow roles around the country is also perceived to be reduce
defaultd once family life is established. I think this option is still open for those with fewer ties, male or female, 
defaultwho are 
defaultwilling to move around to where the 
defaultleading
default jobs are situated.
default7
default. 
defaultChild care, flexible working and return to work from maternity leave
default a
defaultre governed by l
defaultegislation to protect women having children 
defaultin the workplace
default, 
defaultbut 
defaultthe application of this legislation to the policies and procedures within workplaces varies. The culture of long working hours and expectation of availability outside standar
defaultd working hours is still strong, especially in relation to more senior grades
default, where many believe it is not possible to perform these roles part time
default. 
defaultWhen
default women consider applying for promotion they must weigh up the demands on their time with the higher s
defaultalary and status. Often the choice, especially when children are young, is to put off the promotion in 
defaultfavour
default of more family friendly working hours which appear to be easier to 
defaultgain
default at the lower roles. Whilst it is important to promote girls in STEM it is 
defaultalso important to ensure that people have personal choice. I also would like to make the point that this applies to men who chose to have more family friendly work hours and is not distinct from the issue with women. It may be that the stereotypical role o
defaultf the mother at home prevails, but also, 
defaultas 
defaultwomen are consciously choosing to have children and 
defaulthave more control over when to do it, many 
defaultwould like to have some time with them, especially in the early years.
default8
default.
default Flexible working policies do exist but they are not always supported, on the ground, for higher roles. 
defaultC
defaulthoice
defaults
default between staying in current position
defaults
default (
defaultfor example,
default I already work full time on week days with the occasional pre-planned evening shift) and goin
defaultg for a more senior post where the expectation would be to work beyond a regular working week. In practice this would mean seeing less of my children and having to find, costly, childcare. As a specialist in my role, at an already quite senior grade, there
default are no other staff who can share my responsibilities or workload so job share opportunities are al
defaultso not possible. 
defaultSenior roles often involve more managerial aspects than ‘doing’ science. It may not be very appealing to take on the burden of managing a de
defaultpartment when one is often also managing the home
default or children
default at the same time. In some ways this may be a success story for women in STEM; that they are cho
defaulto
defaultsing to 
defaultpursue roles which involve the study or application of science rather than managing the pe
defaultople that do it. 
defaultAlthough it is a right to apply for flexible working it is not a right to be given it. Applications for condensed hours 
defaultor four day weeks do not seem to be granted easily in my experience.
default 
defaultThere is an odd  dichotomy here as once a person i
defaults in a senior role they may have more autonomy to arrange their work and office hours as they see fit (provided it 
defaultget completed, of course) so surprisingly this can be an informal route to flexible working. I expect many women would not feel confident pla
defaultnning to exploit this option prior to them being in post and therefore if a job was not advertised with flexible working they may not consider applying.
defaultFinancially the 
defaultcost of childcare is huge. Full time childcare can be as much as a quarter of a salary 
defaultof £50k. The e
defaultquations do not balance
default and 
defaultal
defaultthough 
defaultI am 
defaultpersonally 
defaultaware this situation should only last a few years and that it should be feasible for me to catch up in the long run
default, it means that I cannot consider applying for the top roles within my 
defaultorg
defaultanisation
default at the moment. 
defaultIt is possible that this realisation comes to other STEM mothers but they decide to continue in their lower roles rather than seek promotion and this then continues for the rest of their working lives. 
defaultImproved change planning and 
defaultrole development could be successful here.
default9. 
defaultCertainly the country has seen a rise in working mothers 
defaulthowever this report also demonstrates that between 66.5% of mothers and 67.3% of women without dependent children were in work.
default 
defaultWomen are also having children later with more women aged 35-49
default 
defaultwith pre-scho
defaultol children.  
defaultSo what are the other women doing? And what proportion of these could be skilled STEM advocates?
default My professional body, the IPEM, have some data on this question.
default10
default. 
defaultIf we now a
defaultssume female and male applicants both apply for the top posts, wh
defaultat could be affecting women being employed? The
default interview
defaulters have e
defaultxpectations of the 
defaultincumbent
default, which may be closely related to their own work and life experiences
default. If these are all men 
default(or women) 
defaultwho have succeeded by putting in many hours and who do not
default have families, it is hard for them to appreciate that a 
defaultmother or carer
default can do just as a good a job within the working week. I was successful at an interview for a deputy head job elsewhere where the panel consisted of a female head with a family. I was s
defaultubsequently told that this 
defaultlevel of role
default would not have been 
defaultaccessible
default to me within my current workplace.
default I am not supportive of women only shortlists but having at least one woman
default, or a person experienced with flexible working and successful work/life ba
defaultlance
default,
default 
defaulton the interview panel for senior jobs
default would, I believe, be massively beneficial
default.
default 
defaultIt is worth pointing out that s
defaultome fathers and men could also suffer from this inequality if they are the main carer, (especially with the change in legislation 
defaultgoverning sharing paternity and maternity leave or adoption leave).
default For me, the NHS 
defaultHigher S
defaultpecialist S
defaultcientific
default Training 
defaultprogramme
default 
defaultcould be a way into the top roles in the country but it is expected to 
defaultbe 
defaultavailable 
defaultfor only a small percentage of 
defaultthe workforce.
default I
default wonder if there is a 
defaultplace for positiv
defaulte discrimination o
defaultr at least, fewer perceived boundaries 
defaultand encouragement 
defaultfor women applying?
default It is my belief that if 
defaulta person is
default governing 
defaultan 
defaultorganisation
default then they sho
defaultuld be 
defaultrepresentative of the 
defaultstaff
default they are governing
default 
default(i.e. a balance and mix of genders, races and life experiences) 
defaultbut if they are managing services then they should be
default the best people for the job
default, regardless of gender
default.
default The difficulty comes when the sen
defaultior role is a mixture of both.
default1
default1
default. 
defaultAdvertising successful role models within science
default should be encouraged
default. This is not always achieved successfully because these women 
defaultoften 
defaultappear as super-women and cannot be related to. It is not possible for the average
default STEM career women to have a live in nanny
default, au pair
default or a stay at home partner for example! Promoting the long haul of a career rather than the short term job prospects
default should be encouraged by professional bodies and the government. This is even more import
defaultant as the age of retirement increases.
default A woman may go through many and varying roles with different working patterns during her working life and this is to be encouraged.
default12
default. 
defaultWith regard to uni
defaultversities and Higher Education Institutions
default retaining women gr
defaultaduates and PhD students
default, this c
defaultould be encouraged by the use of 
defaultclear 
defaultavenues into work. For example, 
defaultby 
defaulttying 
defaulta higher
default degree 
defaultto
default a work pathway or 
defaultcompany
default who encourage flexible working
default,
default 
defaultSTEM subjects
default 
defaultcould
default be made 
defaulttailored
default for companies who require 
defaultspec
defaultialist 
defaultpost graduates, thereby giving them 
defaultaccess
default to the 
defaulthighest
default 
defaultcalibre
default 
defaultof candidates. 
defaultOn completion of the degree the transition to work could be made
default with the knowledge that flexible working and maternity/paternity leave arrangements will not only be co
defaultnsidered but are encouraged for a healthy work/life balance. It is often highly frowned upon
default and discouraged to plan any significant life event during higher degree studies. For one year courses such as MSc, this might be 
defaultunderstandable, but for three year
default PhDs, training schemes and longer or part time courses 
defaultit is
default hig
defaulthly unlikely
default that a major life event won’t happen during that time
default. Higher Education I
defaultnstitutions must make provision for what might happen if women chose this time to start a 
defaultfamily
default. How can
default they come
default back 
defaultinto
default their degree, is there provision for childcare on 
defaultsite
default for them to 
defaultcontinue
default their studies, 
defaulthow
default long can 
defaultthey
default extend for? I 
defaultrealise
default that this is already done on an individual basis but perhaps a clear policy might help girls
default or women
default ch
defaultose their higher education institution
default more carefully.
default13
default. 
defaultWhat role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers? The Government should promote career planning that includes personal goals as well as profession
defaultal 
defaultachievements
default.
default Implementation of family friendly policies at work, not just the presence of a policy should be commended. Financial rewards for companies who actively promote flexible working could be considered.
defaultI have no conflicts of interest in relat
defaultion to this inquiry. I am a member of the Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine who have also provided evidence for this inquiry.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultIPPR Report on ‘The Sandwich Generation: Older Women Balancing Work and Care Ref: http://www.ippr.org/images/media/files/publication/2013/08/sandwich-generati
defaulton-August2013_11168_11168.pdf)
default 
defaultOffice for National Statistics Report ‘Mothers in the Labour Market’, March 2011Ref: http://www.ons.
defaultgov.uk/ons/dcp171776_234036.pdf
default N
defaultot yet fully developed at http://www.nhscareers.nhs.uk/explore-by-career/healthcare-science/training/nhs-higher-special
defaultist-scientific-training-(hsst)/
default