&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by BEAMA default(HOT17)defaultA1
default - Is the government taking the right approach to reduce heat energy demand?
defaultA1.1default 
defaultReducing heat energy demand with primary heat appliances requires growth in heat pumps and higher efficiency replacement technology eg modern dynamic electric storage heaters. BEAMA welcomes the RHI as this will stimulate heat pump demand but believe that 
defaulta more strategic market development programme is required to deliver a sustainable long term supply chain (see 
defaultA5 on Renewable Heat Zones
default).
default 
defaultA1.2default BEAMA believes there should be a stronger policy programme to promote replace
defaultment electric st
defaultorage heaters
default.
default 
defaultTh
defaultere are 6.5 million electric storage heaters in UK homes, supplying 9% of the total housing stock, with a current installed capacity of 105 GW. As such the energy saving and load shifting potential of replacing these with the latest generation products is 
defaultsignificant. If a replacement of all electric storage heaters is completed, it will bring a reduction in CO
default2
default emissions of 1.26 Mton. However there are currently 
defaultonly 
default224,000 replacements of electric storage 
defaultheaters per year, so there is significant 
defaultcapacit
defaulty to i
defaultncrease the rate of replacement
default and achieve the CO
default2 
defaultsavings far sooner.
defaultA1.3 defaultData produced by BEAMA in 2009 with the Energy Saving Trust indicated that there were millions of UK homes without a reasonable level of heating controls. Specifically, the 
defaultdata showed that around 8 million homes don’t have a room thermostat and 9 million homes don’t have TRV
defaults (thermostatic radiator valves
default)
default.
default New research carried out on behalf of the controls manufacturers’ association within BEAMA shows that the installation 
defaultof effective temperature controls on home heating systems has a far more significant effect on minimising energy use than has previously been predicted. Independent tests were carried out by the University of Salford
default 
defaulton the performance of heating controls 
defaultin their Energy House facility. This facility consists of 
defaulta 
defaultfull size house built within an environmental chamber, and is designed to monitor energy consumption before and after retrofit measures are installed so that 
defaultthe 
defaulttrue 
defaulteffectiveness of new
default and exis
defaultting 
defaulttechnologies 
defaultto reduce energy can be assessed
default.
default The tests showed that energy consumption by heating systems can be reduced by up to 40% through the installation of a room thermostat and TRVs. 
defaultA1.4 defaultThe top line results from the tests are shown in the t
defaultable below. 
defaultTests carried outdefault24 hr heating costdefaultReduced cost from controlsdefault1 - No temperature control
default 
default(other than boiler stat
default)
default£5.31
default0%
default2 – Control by room thermostat only
default£4.68
default12
default.
default0
default%
default3 – Control by room thermostat + TRVs
default£3.15
default40.7%
default&#xa0;
defaultA1.5 defaultThe scale of savings shown in these tests is significantly better than what is generally assumed, particularly for TRVs. The same house had an assessment carried out using the SAP methodology, which is the standard calculation tool used by Government in ma
defaultny of its policy tools such as the Green Deal. Under this tool the energy savings from the addition of TRVs is estimated at 2%, rather 
defaultthan the approximate 30% savings shown under the actual tests. On the basis of this new evidence Government should be doi
defaultng more to ensure that the full scope for demand reduction through the application of controls in all UK homes is realised in practice
default.
default In practice we would recommend that:
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIt should be made a requirement under Part L of the building regulations that TRVs 
defaultare installed when a boiler is replaced. At present it is only recommended as good practice even though the installation of TRVs is much more economic when a boiler is replaced as the system will already be drained down.
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIt should be mandatory that propert
defaulties receiving heating measures under the Green Deal have both a room thermostat and TRVs. As well as the savings from these measures themselves it is clear from the University of Salford research that a hydronic heating system will only operate as intended
default with appropriate controls installed.  
defaultA1.6default 
defaultInformation from members shows m
defaultany 
defaultdomestic heating systems 
defaultare not
default 
defaultflushed
default 
defaultwith water treatment chemicals
default following installation of a new boiler
default or new entire system
default. 
defaultThis means installation debris remains in
default the system,
default lead
defaulting
default to corrosion of system
default components
default.
default 
defaultCorrosion leads to 
defaultfurther 
defaulto
defaultbstructive debris 
default(sludge) 
defaultin radiators that can reduce 
defaulttheir 
defaultoverall effectiveness by up to 15%, and reduc
defaulte
default boiler efficiency by 2-3%. 
defaultChemically cleaning a heating system
default is recommended by the Building Regulations Domestic Compliance Guide, so the correct recommendat
defaultion is in place, but the Guide is not
default 
defaultfollowed
default frequently enough in practice meaning many domestic heating systems are operating at efficiency below their pote
defaultntial.
defaultA1.7 defaultBuilding Regulations have been successful in transforming the gas heating market to condensing technology but a programme is now required leading to A+ heat systems being regulated for installation from 2020.
default 
defaultA1.8 defaultThere is no policy at all for
default the development of high efficiency storage methods for hot water (e.g. promotion and incentivising of super insulated cylinders using new insulants rather than increasing thickness of insulation).
default&#xa0;
defaultA2
default - What progress is the government making on reducing t
defaulthe demand for heat?
defaultA2.1 defaultIn terms of heat pumps progress has been very slow. Market growth in 2008/9 has flattened (less than 20,000 units per annum) with very little success in the one-off private market. This means the fourth carbon budget projections are unlikely to be met even
default with a successful RHI roll out unless a more focused strategic plan is deployed 
default(see A5 on Renewable Heat Zones)
default. 
defaultA2.2default Electric storage was promoted in the Government's 2012 paper 'The Future of Heating', and mentioned in places in the 2013 follow up pap
defaulter, but there needs to be a plan to switch old electric storage technology to modern high efficiency electric storage alternatives.
default 
default There are 6.5 million electric storage heaters in UK homes, supplying 9% of the total housing stock, with a current install
defaulted capacity of 105 GW. As such the energy saving and load shifting potential of replacing these with the latest generation products is significant. If a replacement of all electric storage heaters is completed, it will bring a reduction in CO
default2
default emissions of
default 1.26 Mton. However there are currently 
defaultonly
default 
default224,000 replacements of electric storage heaters per year, so there is significant capacity to increase the rate of replacement and achieve the CO
default2 
defaultsavings far sooner.
default&#xa0;
defaultA3
default - What are the relative merits of using
default gas to directly provide space heating compared to cent
defaultr
defaultalised electricity 
defaultproduction plus domestic heat p
defaultumps?
defaultA3.1 defaultAcc
defaultording to Sutherland 
defaultTables 
defaultfigures (A
defaultpril 2013), an air source heat pump with space heating efficiency of 250% is more cost effective i
defaultn a 3 bed semi versus gas condensing equivalent (£960 vs £1022 per annum).  However, at this stage the difference is marginal and the main target for heat pumps is off the gas network where savings can justify the increased capital cost of heat pump instal
defaultlation.  
defaultA3.2 defaultHowever, this does not factor in the supply chain cost benefit of 
defaultDemand Side Response
default when switching to heat pumps. 
defaultIt should also be noted that as electricity grid carbon intensity decreases there will be social value in switching to heat 
defaultpumps.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultA4
default - Why does the RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully?
defaultA4.1 defaultIt is currently too early to make a judgement on the domestic RHI but BEAMA is satisfied that the tariff levels will provide a suitable incentive at this stage.  However, we a
defaultre concerned that there has been a significant delay in the scheme launch which has held the market back and we now need more focus on zone promotion 
default(see A5 on Renewable Heat Zones)
default.  Also, Green Deal and ECO need to have a greater emphasis on heat pump p
defaultromotion as the GD plans currently favour conventional heat technology over heat pumps due to the golden rule and 
defaultabsence of 
defaultlink to RHI subsidy.
default 
defaultA4.2 defaultIn addition to this response we do foresee some customer confusion when trying to combine the schemes, o
defaultr indeed if they are not combined.  On the latter point we advocate that all Green Deal assessors have sufficient RHI and technology training so that even if the EPC recommends an oil boiler replacement (condensing for non-condensing), the assessor can add
defaultitionally promote the non EPC related benefits of heat pump savings and significant RHI income potential.  If this is not properly managed, customers may end up buying oil boilers then finding out down the line that they could have had much higher net bene
defaultfits by buying a heat pump.  We can 
defaultforesee
default some problems when combining the schemes.  For example, if a customer has a Green Deal assessment, it will provide very standardised house and occupancy data that will differ from that provided by the competent i
defaultnstaller who will undertake a full heat loss calculation and use specific heat pump data.  This performance gap may prove a turn off for customers who will question the validity of opposing data.  
default&#xa0;
defaultA4.3 defaultAs a final point, we have advised DECC that the requ
defaultirement for a Green Deal assessment is likely to prove a barrier to take up as has been proven with the dramatic drop off of RHPP voucher levels since the RHPP was linked to Green Deal assessments in April/May 2013. Our preferred initial entry criteria wou
defaultld be a simplified EPC.
default 
defaultA5 – Evidence relevant to A1, A2 and A4
defaultBackgrounddefaultA5.1 defaultIn 2012, DECC attended a BEAMA meeting at which it was suggested that the Government was exploring the opportunities for developing ‘Renewable Hubs’ under which there would b
defaulte the over-riding objectives for ‘areas of mass deployment’.  Discussions with some BEAMA members and outside influencers has suggested this is a sound idea but may need tuning to be an all encompassing and market stimulating activity.
defaultThe Case for Renewabdefaultle Heat ZonesdefaultA5.2 defaultThe Government has already outlined a high heat pump uptake scenario off the gas network up to 2020.  There currently exists a number of incentives and policy mechanisms to stimulate the uptake of heat pumps and renewable heat technologi
defaultes generally.  These include the Energy Company Obligation, The Renewable Heat Incentive (currently in Premium Payment format for one off domestic customers) and, to a lesser extent, Green Deal.  All of these are underpinned by the Microgeneration Certific
defaultation Scheme.  
defaultA5.3 defaultDespite the policy weight there remain a number of practical issues that may be alleviated by the development of Renewable Heat Zones:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultA5.4 defaultAn RHZ has appeal 
defaultfor the following supply chain actors:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default              
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat Would The RHZ Do?defaultA5.5 defaultIn the 1990s, Local Authorities were bound by the Home Energy Conservation Act to develop and implement plans to promote energy efficiency in their area.  The Energy Saving Trust developed a support programme called HECAction and through this programme the
default lead authority would commit to a plan which would be seed corn funded.  
defaultA5.6 defaultAn RHZ would operate similarly but on a voluntary basis.  In principle, the lead authority/body in an RHZ would work with the above supply chain actors to formulate a 3-5 year p
defaultlan for renewable heat growth.  Within this plan there would be absolute targets for renewable heat deployment based on an understanding of the RHZ customer/dwelling types and propensity for take up.  For example, an objective may be to install 30,000 heat
default pumps in the RHZ over 3 years.  This type of objective gives confidence to installers that a market is planned; provides an impetus for marketing effort; gives planning signals to the network operator to channel business plan funding under ED1; brings ene
defaultrgy suppliers to the fore with tariffs; shines a light on training and certification hot spots; creates positive customer perceptions in the area; allows merchants and others to channel their support.
defaultA5.7 defaultThe practicality is that such an approach can requ
defaultire seed corn funding to kick start the project which may subsidise initial resources required e.g. a co-ordinator on the ground, marketing etc.
defaultHow To Deliver RHZsdefaultA5.8 defaultThere are a number of ways to deliver this framework but there are three major require
defaultments:
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default