&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Glass and Glazing Federation (HOT29)defaultThe GGF is the main representative organisation for companies involved in all aspects of the manufacture of flat glass and products and services for all types of glazing, in commercial and dom
defaultestic sectors. The GGF has approximately 500 members of all sizes who can be found in over 1,500 business locations throughout the UK.
defaultQuestion 1: defaultIs the government taking the right approach to reduce heat energy demand?defaultA key part of reducing heat demand 
defaultis ensuring that there is less 
defaultheat 
defaultwaste
default.  This is best achieved by increasing energy efficiency, particularly in 
defaultthe UK’s
default building
default 
defaultstock
default which is currently a significant contributor to carbon loss and heat waste. A
defaultround 
defaultone
default third
default of the heat produced by 
defaulta central heating system is 
defaultrapidly lost through 
defaulta building’s 
defaultroof, walls, doors, windows and floors
default,
default and 
defaultaccording to the Energy Saving Trust, 
default25% 
defaultof
default heat from a building escapes through non ene
defaultrgy efficient windows and doors
default.
default 
defaultWhilst
default 
defaultthe 
defaultGGF 
defaultacknowledges 
defaultthat the Government has made positive steps towards addressing the 
defaultneed to increase the
default energy efficiency
default of the UK’s housing stock in order to reduce heat waste
default, we believe that there is still much that should be done. 
defaultThe GGF is supportive of the Govern
defaultment’s introduction of the Green Deal and Energy Company Obligation
default (ECO)
default, as part of the UK’s efforts to reduce heat energy demand.
default 
defaultHowever
default, despite the benefits of the scheme, 
defaultthe recent figures published by the Department of Energy and Climate Change
default have revealed that there has been a slow uptake. 
default 
defaultThe GGF believes that the 
defaultG
defaultovernment must do more to incentivise uptake of the Green Dea
defaultl
default and ECO
default in order to reduce waste
default, reduce heat energy demand
default and meet the UK’s carbon targets
default. 
default 
defaultA number of Green D
defaulteal trials have 
defaultrevealed 
defaultthat windows are popular with consumers
default. For example, a
default 
defaulttrial by Gentoo revealed that double glazing 
defaultwas very popular with customers
default who
default reported that windows offered extra benefits to other measures, which therefore made them mor
defaulte likely to install double glazing rather than any other measure. Participants in the trial reported feeling an extra sense of warmth and security and noted the importance of double glazing in blocking out excess sound. 
default Windows can also play an important 
defaultrole in encouraging consumers to install further measures in their homes, thereby helping to encourage a consumer to 
defaultadopt a “whole house” approach
default. 
default For example, there is much interaction between solid wall insulation (SWI) and windows, as to undertake SW
defaultI work correctly the windows should be replaced or the existing windows removed and reinstalled on wider projection sills and possibly external linings. The GGF has found that 
defaulthouseholders
default 
defaultare often disinterested in solid wall insulation however, as recent
default Green Deal trials have demonstrated, they are attracted to the idea of new windows and doors.  
defaultGiven the popularity of windows with consumers, the GGF believes that more must be done to make windows a more attractive proposition under the Green Deal as t
defaulthis could result in more consumers improving their windows and installing other measures at the same time. As such, alt
defaulthough the GGF 
defaultis supportive of the 
defaultsteps taken by the Government to improve energy efficiency and reduce heat waste, we believe that 
defaultfurt
defaulther incentives must be introduced to encourage take up of the 
defaultGreen Deal and 
defaultECO 
defaultand would support the introduction of
default such schemes as
default 
defaultvariable rates of stamp duty and council tax based on the energy efficiency of a property as an incentive to Green Deal u
defaultptake.
default  
defaultIn addition, t
defaulthe GGF 
defaultbelieves that DECC has made positive steps towards correcting an 
defaultECO
default Statutory Instrument 
default(SI) 
defaultwhich 
defaultto date has had a significant effect in dis
default-
defaultincentivising consumers from installing windows under the ECO.  On the 24
defaultth
default July 
default2013, DECC published a consultation document which seeks views on 
defaultallow
defaulting
default energy suppliers to count a higher carbon saving score towards their targets for delivering replacement window units compared to under the existing rule.
default 
default  It is vital that this change to the existing SI be made in order to
default encourage more window installation
defaults
default under ECO which, give
defaultn
default the popularity of windows and the focus on a whole house approach, could lead to increased uptake of further energy e
defaultfficiency 
defaultmeasures in the home, resulting in a
default further
default reduction of heat energy demand. 
defaultQuestion 2: defaultWhat progress is the government making on reducing the demand for heat?defaultAlthough the government has made some progress on addressing the UK’s need to make its buildi
defaultng stock much more energy efficient, the GGF believes that more must be done to 
defaultincentivise 
defaulthouseholders and commercial property owners to increase the ene
defaultrgy efficiency of their properties
default.  As mentioned above, the Government has a vital role to play in i
defaultncentivising this uptake in order for the UK to make real progress towards meeting its carbon targets.   
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/green-deal-and-energy-company-obligation-eco-monthly-statistics-august-2013
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&amp;rct=j&amp;q=gentoo%20-%20a%20look%20at%20a%20pay%20as%20you%20save%20trial&amp;source=web&amp;cd=4&amp;ved=0CDUQFjAD&amp;url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.gentoogroup.com%2FPay_As_You_Save%2FPay_As_You_Save_Part_1&amp;ei=0-0rT4LjPIiu8APflqjhDg&amp;usg=AFQjCNEHlc6
default31VD3eaNAkC5UAGwyQkXNcg
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/updates-to-the-electricity-and-gas-energy-companies-ob
defaultligation-order-2012
default&#xa0;
default