&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence
default 
defaultfrom four rural parish bus surveys
default 
defaultin the Hexham 
default/North Tyne valley 
defaultarea of 
defaultWest 
defaultNorthumberland (TIC 063)
defaultIntroduction 
defaultand summary
default 
defaultThe evidence presented relates to scheduled pubic bus services and therefore omits the Committee’s points 4 and 5 as these concern community transport, taxis and demand responsive services outside the scope of the four parish surveys.
defaultHexham is the princip
defaultal market town in West Northumberland and serves a large sparsely populated rural hinterland. 
defaultHexham itself has good bus and rail links to Newcastle, Gateshead and Carlisle but the smaller towns and villages which Hexham serves depend on supported bus serv
defaultices and community transport. Because of the long distances involved the cost per passenger is relatively high
default, communities which Hexham serves include Kielder 38 miles, Bellingham 18 miles, and Allendale 11 miles. 
default The County Council is 
defaultcurrently reviewin
defaultg
default the 
defaultsupport it provides for bus 
defaultservices
default to these communities 
defaultand it is unlikely that current levels of support can be maintained
default in 2014 and thereafter
default. Any reduction in 
defaultbus 
defaultservices will 
defaultadd to car dependency and 
defaultadversely affect 
defaultthe quality of life an
defaultd 
defaultaccess 
defaultto essential services for people living in the rural communities served by Hexham. 
default1. How do government and local authorities identify demand for passenger transport in isolated communities? 
defaultD
defaultemand is identified 
defaultby the local authority 
defaultthrough collection of on bus data recording
default 
default. 
defaultThis approach has serious limitations because no account can be taken of 
defaultpotentialdefault demand. 
defaultA
default series of surveys 
defaulthave been 
defaultconducted by four 
defaultrural 
defaultparish councils in 
defaultthe Hexham area (along the North Tyne valley) 
defaultduring 
default 
default2012 and 2013 
defaultto assess potential demand for 
defaultpublic transport
default as well as asking existing users why they choose to use the bus
default. 
defaultSince
default the railway serving this area closed in 1956 
default(Hexham to Hawick) 
defaultbuses are the only public transport available. 
defaultThe
default 
defaultfour parish
default surveys, which were distributed to every 
defaulthome
default and returned by over 3
default4
default0 households, 
defaultshowed 
defaultthat the main
default 
defaultreasons that 
defaultpeople did not use the bus 
defaultwere:
default(a) they did not know when the bus ran
default (poor publicity and lack of timetables) 
default(b) the bus di
defaultd not go where they wanted to go
default 
default(e.g. local supermarkets and health centres) 
default 
default(c) buses were unreliable 
defaultand irregular
default. 
defaultThose opting to use the bus did so 
default(a) because they did not have access to a car 
default(b) because its better for the environment
defaultThe majo
defaultrity of bus users in the village communities 
defaultsurveyed 
defaultare aged over 60 and around half have no access to a car. 
defaultMost of those who do have a car and choose to use the bus do so for environmental reasons.  
default 
defaultNorthumberland County Council is 
defaultusing the informa
defaulttion collected in these parish surveys to help in its financial review of the bus services which it supports. If the key issues 
defaultof information, routes and regularity 
defaultcan be addressed bus usage will increase. In fact operators have already noticed an increa
defaultse in passenger numbers since the surveys were conducted. 
defaultP
defaultlans for supported services from 2014 onwards currently being finalised by 
defaultNorthumberland
default County Council and should result in a more regular timetable
defaults
default and amended routes 
defaultto include Hexham’s superm
defaultarkets. Higher passenger numbers should help to make the services more economically viable. However the County Council is having to make cuts to its supported bus services budget while at the same time operators costs are rising (and they are having to abs
defaultorb the 20% reduction in the BOSG). 
defaultThe result is almost certain to be a reduction in the services provided to this very rural area leading to 
default(a) more car dependence and 
default(b) more, mostly older people, becoming isolated. 
default(c) reduced
default access to the countryside for people living in Hexham itself. 
defaultThese are issues which concern Hexham as a traditional market town serving a large rural hinterland. 
default&#xa0;
default2. To what extent are the needs of different groups of passengers taken into account in d
defaultetermining the provision of public transport to isolated communities? 
default(a) 
defaultPeople with ddefaultisabilitiesdefault 
defaultand young children’s needsdefault 
defaultContracts for supported bus services require operators to use accessible (low floor) vehicles however in the four parish surveys 
defaultabout 33% of respondents gave concern about being able to board the bus as a reason for not using the bus. This is an issue which affects people 
defaultwith disabilities 
default(mostly older people) and parents with young children in pushchairs
default (both groups of people wh
defaulto are very likely to need to use the bus). Although operators are required to provide low floor buses the experience of those responding to the parish surveys is that unsuitable buses are frequently substituted. This undermines confidence in the service. 
default(b) defaultMedical needsdefault: a
defaultmongst the parish survey respondents the second most frequently cited reason for using the bus (after going shopping) was to attend medical appointments. Older people who make up the bulk of rural bus passengers have high non emergency 
defaultmedical needs
default. For the 50% without access to a car their continuing independence may depend on being able to use the bus to get to GP and dental practices and hospital appointments in Hexham. Lack of public transport can lead therefore to premature transfe
defaultr to a care home.
default3. What are the main challenges associated with providing better and more consistent services to isolated communities? How can these challenges be overcome?
default(a)default defaultStimulating demanddefault: t
defaulthe parish surveys referred to above suggest that a key c
defaulthallenge is to identify and capitalise on 
defaultpotentialdefault demand rather than relying wholly on actual bus usage data. 
defaultHow to overcome this
default 
defaultchallenge?
defaultTo release this latent demand and thus increase passenger numbers existing rural bus services need 
default(1) to
default be actively promoted using route branding techniques and widely distributed timetables. This should form part of the contract for any service receiving public support, marketing should also focus on the environmental benefits of using public transport (ju
defaultst as re-cycling is promoted bu most local authorities) 
default(2) to be regular and reliable departing at fixed intervals.
default(3) to be routed to serve key locations including supermarkets and health centres
default(4) to use only low access buses (with no substitution ‘
defaultloop holes’ in the contract.
default(5) to ensure that timetables, once in place, are maintained for as long as possible. 
default(b) defaultTravel to workdefault: 
defaultThe parish surveys indicated that a small but significant number of people 
defaultfrom as far away as Bellingham 
defaultuse the bus to
default get to their place of work. These journeys tend to be in the early morning and in the evening, times when use by other passengers is low. Consequently it is these journeys which are seen as being the least ‘economic’ but most in need of support. 
defaultHow to 
defaultovercome this
default 
defaultchallenge?
defaultUse of a demand responsive service dedicated to this group of users and employing a small vehicle (e.g. 12 or 16 seat) might be appropriate especially as it could be tailored to user’s needs in terms of pick up and connections to o
defaultnward bus and train services from Hexham to Tyneside. 
default4. Community transport
default: 
defaultno responsedefault 
default5. Alternative forms of provision:
default 
defaultno responsedefault  
default6 What are the main challenges associated with funding transport services in isolated communities? How can these se
defaultrvices be made more affordable? 
default(defaultadefault) High costs related to long distances with low population density: defaultthe rural areas which Hexham serves are sparsely populated and served by buses which, in the case of the Hexham to Kielder route involve a
default 
default2hr 50minute r
defaultound trip timetable with no stopover. Evaluation of the cost of supported services should have an adjustment formula to disregard the impact of distance in sparsely populated areas otherwise these long routes will always be at a disadvantage when cost per 
defaultpassenger is assessed.
default(b) Reducing defaultthe defaultcost per passengerdefault by increasing passenger numbersdefault: defaultbased on the four parish surveys there is potential to considerably increase the usage of existing services and thereby reduce the cost per passenger. Additional fa
defaultres would reduce the level of public support required. 
default(c) Encourage isolated communities to trial a volunteer driven public scheduled bus service: defaultthis approach has been successfully piloted b
defaulty
default defaultHedgehog Bus, the North Cotswold Community Bus Association
default 
defaulthttp://hedgehogbus.org/
default(d) Seek additional sources of funding for scheduled services including:default- Parish and Town Council contributions 
default- voluntary contributions from bus users entitled to concessionary fares
default- 
defaultsubsidies from supermarkets.
default(e) defaultCalculate overall cost / benefits when looking at ‘affordability default- 
defaultthe additional environmental cost of increased car use arising from discontinuation of bus services
default- the additional cost of dedicated transport for people
default needing to access medical services
default- the loss of local 
defaultbus industry 
defaultemployment arising from discontinuation of bus services 
default- the impact on new housing planning permissions of villages becoming inaccessible by public transport and therefore ineligible fo
defaultr housing expansion. 
default- the loss of business to market towns like Hexham arising from discontinuation of bus services. Bus routes focus on Hexham while car dependence expands travelling distances and accelerates use of out of town shopping centres such as 
defaultthe Gateshead Metrocentre.  
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultParish Council surveys of bus use were conducted during 2012 / 2013 in the parishes of Acomb, Humshaugh, and Chollerton
default and in the Bellingham / Kielder area. 
default