&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the defaultAdefaultthena Swan Action Group, defaultSt George’s, University of London (SGUL) (WSC027)default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultIntroduction
defaultWe are pleased to respond to the Science and Technology Committee (Commons) inquiry into Women in STEM Careers.  We hope this information is useful to you as you work on your review.
default&#xa0;defaultAbout SGUL
defaultSGUL is a college of the University of London training medical, biomedical science, nursing, radiography, and physiotherapy students.  Our award-winning undergraduate and graduate recruitment schemes ensure the next generation of health-care workers reflec
defaultts our community.  SGUL is also a post-graduate research institute, specializing in translational research 
default&#xa0;defaultImpact of Dame Sally Davies announcement on SGUL
defaultWe would like to thank Dame Sally Davies for her concrete commitment to gender equality in science
default.  In particular, we fully support her announcement regarding the future link between measurable improvements in institutional equality and NIHR research funding.  The requirement for an Athena Silver award impacts directly on our institution, as NIHR is a
default significant source of our income.  We are able to make a stronger case for 
defaultimportannt
default improvements as a direct result, as summarized below.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur initial application for an Athena Bronze award was submitted in November 2012 and was unsuccessful.  We receiv
defaulted useful feedback from the Athena Swan committee regarding areas of concern, and it has been very valuable to compare ourselves to other institutions.  
default&#xa0;
defaultOur next submission for an Athena Bronze award will be in November 2013, and this has been given high
defaulter priority at the management level, and is now discussed on all key committees.  Quality data has been collected regarding staff job descriptions, promotions, recruitment and flexible working.  This data was previously not available and has flagged up are
defaultas of concern.  Transparency regarding senior committee appointments and decision making is improving.  A wide variety of actions has been implemented or will be proposed in our bid in order to support the working environment for women at SGUL.  These incl
defaultude job descriptions, promotion and recruitment processes, role models, mentoring, networking opportunities, flexible work plans and maternity leave.  In addition to the required Self-Assessment Team, we also have a large group of enthusiastic volunteers f
defaultor our Athena Swan Action Group.
default&#xa0;
defaultSGUL acknowledges that we are still in the early stages of our aim for an Athena Silver Award, but progress so far is encouraging.  The direct link between future funding and the Award has focussed minds and ensured suppor
defaultt from a broader range of SGUL staff and management.
default&#xa0;defaultRole of Government
default&#xa0;
defaultLinking research funding to an accredited programme for departmental or research institutions regarding the role of women (such as Athena Swan) should be mandatory.
default&#xa0;
defaultResearch council
defaults set the funding and the research agenda.  They should have policy statements on funding equality, and release information on grant awardees at least annually.
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default