&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by E.ONdefaultExecutive SummarydefaultWe are supportive of approaches designed to reduce heat demand and use heat more efficiently.
default Customers need to be well informed as to how they can reduce their demand, and insulation should be the
default first
default priority. 
defaultWe would like to see a joined up approach to heat, across all of Government. Actions taken in one Government department can have signi
defaultficant knock on effects to other Government policy objectives. For example changes in planning currently being consulted upon with
defaultin the Housing Standards Review
default will impact the likelihood of distributed community energy projects being realised
default with a pote
defaultntial negative effect on the ability to reach desired heat targets
default.
defaultThe heat market is constantly evolving and
default,
default whilst there are a number of barriers to be overcome (financial, knowledge, procurement etc),
default some 
defaultprogress is being made. We welcome Government
default’
defaults continued focus in this area.
defaultWe support a credible, independently audited and robust biomass sustainability policy. We are supportive of DECC’s work to date within this area,
default and welcome the recent response confirming grandfathering of new criteria whi
defaultch will provide longer 
defaultterm certainty for investors.
defaultQuestionsdefaultIt 
defaultis critical that 
defaultany 
defaultheat policy is stable and free from shocks and u-turns.
default  
defaultGover
defaultnment needs
default an integrated approac
defaulth across the whole built environment when it comes to heat energy demand reduction. It is therefore critical that all Government departments work together with the same common objective.
defaultWe support 
defaultthe 
defaultGovernment’s intention that it
default i
defaults 
defaulti
defaultnsulation first.
default defaultIm
defaultproving the fabric of buildings will increase their efficiency and may be the cheapest way to reduce carbon emissions. This should always be the first step towards low carbon heating. However, it is important that energy efficiency requirements (i.e. the l
defaultevel of efficiency a property must achieve) are both realistic and achievable for the consumer, taking account of the type of property they live in. 
defaultWe agree that the 
defaultGovernment s
defaulthould support
default a range of heat technologies, 
defaultbut these must be th
defaulte right technology in the right location to encourage least cost carbon abatement. 
defaultLearning lessons from previous policies, it is important to avoid any one technology being 
defaultover rewarded.
default 
defaultThe 
defaultGovernment recently consulted on increasing the tariff for cer
defaulttain technologies under the RHI
default, for 
defaultwhich we
default have
default expressed support
default. The RHI has shown some success but
default,
default for a real step change
default 
defaultto occur
default,
default the tariffs did need revisiting. We would advocate the ongoing monitoring of this scheme to ensure unsustainable bubb
defaultles are not created.
default Whilst we are pleased that the tariffs were revisited, 
defaultthe
default Government could do more within the RHI to promote district heating. 
defaultD
defaultistrict heating
default is a 
defaultmeans of efficiently distributing heat across significant distances. This infrastruc
defaultture allows heat to be used effectively and
default,
default when used to distribute renewable or waste heat or heat from efficient CHP
default,
default it can allow developers or local authorities to deliver significant carbon saving across wide areas.
default We welcome 
defaultthe 
defaultGovernment’s recogn
defaultition that this is an important part of the heat energy mix and 
defaultits 
defaultintention to consider seriously how this could be better supported. 
defaultWe believe this could be done in a 
defaultnumber of ways. We would suggest the most suitable method is a district heating netw
defaultork uplift to the RHI to support the renewable heat strategy, incentivising the deployment of the right technology in the right locations. There is also a role for the public and private sector to provide anchor loads for district heating networks
default. Governm
defaultent owned buildings connecting to district heating networks have a key role to play here. The refurbishment of Government owned buildings at a rate of 3% per annum
default, as
default stipulated under Article 5 of the 2012 EU Energy Efficiency Directive
default,
default could provide a u
defaultseful mechanism through which to encourage such connections
default. Policy and planning will need to encourage them to do this which could lead to a very positive impact on the viability of district heating across the 
defaultUK
default.
defaultEnergy efficiency and well informed customers 
defaultare 
defaultthe right starting point. 
defaultThere are a number of Government policies aimed at tackling energy efficiency
default and looking at more efficient heating systems (smart meter rollout, EC
defaultO, Green Deal, RHI
default, Energy Saving Opportunity Scheme
default etc)
default. 
defaultSince 
defaultmany are in their infancy
default or development stage
default,
default 
defaultit is important to allow time for their value to be realised, before making any significant change.
default We would urge Government to consider all the schemes in a joined up approach to achieve the most from what is already in place.
defaultThe 
defaultGovernment
default’s
default role is not to pick technology winners but
default,
default where policy intervention is required
default,
default to set 
defaulta 
defaultsuitable framework
default to allow for innovation and investment. I
defaultncentive schemes 
defaultshould remain stable
default,
default but with clearly set review periods to u
defaultnderstand the costs and any non-financial barriers that may exist. Government support should be provided on a transparent and fair basi
defaults which encourages 
defaultthe market to develop
default. 
defaultWe welcome
default the establishment of the 
defaultHeat Office within DECC
default, and
default look forward to more detailed policy emerging from the recent publication ‘The Future of Heating: Meeting the challenge
default’
default.
defaultWe agree that biomass is a key fuel for heat production and that its contribution to th
defaulte UK’s wider climate targets should be ensured by introducing longer term GHG targets and a 
defaultcredible, robust, independently auditable biomass sustainability policy
default, something 
defaultE.ON has
default had in place since 2009.
default We support 
defaultG
defaultovernment’s overall intentions in t
defaulthese areas
default and the recent policy announcement to set longer term targets for GHG which will be grandfathered. 
defaultThis strikes the right balance in setting tighter, but achievable targets within a longer term framework that will encourage the best biomass sche
defaultmes to be progressed
default.
defaultYes, we welcome the new biomass sustainability criteria that apply from April 2014. The new criteria are more challenging for biomass operators and address a num
defaultber of concerns raised around the sourcing of biomass. The move to sustainable forest management criteria
default,
default for example, will further encourage the sourcing of biomass from the 
defaultmore 
defaultappropriate locations such as Canada and the USA.
defaultWhen considering the local environmental impact it is important to consider the fuel that is being replaced. Generally speaking, 
defaultcentralised heat production in CHP or community energy schemes is likely to reduce
default the
default environmental impact overall 
defaultwhen compared to traditional 
defaultheat generation such as gas fired boilers. This is due to 
defaultfactors such as increased efficiency and increased 
defaultdispersion levels.
default There could be an increase in 
defaultthe 
defaultimpact in the immediate vicinity of a heat generation centre but this would be more than offset 
defaulta 
defaultby reduction in
default the
default environmental impact at the point of heat consumption.
defaultThe location of centralised he
defaultat generation in urban areas 
defaultshould
default 
defaultensure that local environmental impacts in the immediate vicinity are 
defaultminimised and 
defaultbalanced against the overall reduction in environmental impact and the need 
defaultto be close to centres of demand to maximise efficiency. 
defaultThe current UK
default gas infrastructure is mature and developed
default,
default which provides obvious costs benefits compared t
defaulto new technologies.
default 
defaultWe 
defaultbelieve that the electrification of domestic heating through 
defaultheat pumps 
defaultis the right long-term strategy
default,
default subject to a decarbonised 
defaultgeneration supply
default, 
defaultbut this will
default 
defaultrequire new skills to be developed and scaled quickly
default. 
defaultHowever, it is
default important to recognise the role of other technologies such as more efficient gas boilers and micro-CHP as part of the transition to this longer term ambition of domestic heating.
defaultWe would caution against assumptions that new sources of unconventional gas 
defaultin the UK will dramatic
defaultally
default reduce energy bills. New sources of gas could have a beneficial impact on price 
defaultbut 
defaultit should be recognised
default both
default that 
defaultthere are uncertainties about the scale and recoverability of unconventional gas in the UK and that 
defaultthe UK is
default 
defaultpart of
default a well connected 
defaultEuropean 
defaultmarket and
default 
defaultconsequently
default UK gas prices are strongly influenced by wider European and global gas prices.
default 
defaultCommunity heating / CHP, which we typically would see as being
default district heating, o
defaultffers flexibility over time as a number of different heat sources can supply the same network
default. It can be 
defaultintegrated within local authority plans for urban growth and regeneration
default. Currently it is estimated that less than 2% of the 
defaultUK
default’s 
defaultheat demand is provided via heat networks. Much more could and should be made of this. 
defaultT
defaulthe community energy/district heating schemes emerging in the 
defaultUK
default over the last ten years can be split into two distinct types:
defaultThere are a number of barriers facing community heating, with one of the main difficulties being 
defaultattracting finance and reaching commercialisati
defaulton. O
defaultbtaining
default 
defaultcapital funding is a challenge because 
defaultthe typical 
defaultpayback
default for a proje
defaultct is 
defaultlong in commercial terms,
default 
defaultco
defaultupled with a high upfront cost
default and
default 
defaultuncertainty of return. This is mainly due to
default 
defaultuncertainties with the availability and longevity
default 
defaultof the heat loads, the prices obtainable for the
default 
defaultheat and electricity produced and the cost 
defaultof
default 
defaultthe fuel supply. 
defaultIt
default i
defaults a market 
defaultin the UK 
defaultwhich is still relatively new and in its infancy, with 
defaultindustry
default 
defaultuncertainty about 
defaultregulation contributing to the increased 
defaultinvestment risk.
default However, in other European countries such as Sweden and De
defaultn
defaultmark, distri
defaultct heating is a mature solution
default.
defaultIn addition,
default some p
defaultroperty developers 
defaulthave 
defaultconcerns 
defaultaround 
defaultselling homes linked to networks
default. The 
defaultsupply of heat to heat network
default 
defaultcustomers is subject to consumer protection
default law but
default,
default as a key player within this field, we have
default advocated the establishment of an 
defaultIndependent Heat Customer Protection Scheme
default, which sets out standards to apply to the operators of district heating networks
default. This 
defaultwill be critical to building confidence with cu
defaultstomers and the general public.
defaultIssues whic
defaulth are also regarded as important both by local authority and property developer representatives include the need to ensure transparency in heat pricing
default (as noted above)
default and a lack of generally accepted contractual arrangements. Resolving these issues 
defaultmust 
defaultbe a priority for
default ensuring that community energy becomes more common in the 
defaultUK
default. DECC has conducted research into barriers which are currently prevent
defaulting
default the deployment of individual district heating schemes
default.
defaultLocal authorities 
defaultshould take a central role in 
defaultenabling the development, deployment and expansion of heat networks
default within their locality
default. Anchor loads through public buildings and social housing can provide a steady source of heat demand and long term confidence for investors.
default If authorities publicised
default 
defaultcommunity 
defaultheating
default opportunities and the availability of suitable sources of heat demand
default, this may h
defaultelp bring together the owners of heat demand, energy suppliers and infrastructure providers and communities to develop the potential for low and zero carbon
default heat infrastructure in their areas.
defaultThe Heat Office within DECC has stated its intention to review this area and look for opportunities to help open up the market and remove some of the barriers investors and communities face. We believe incentives, for e
defaultxample through a district heating uplift tariff within the RHI, 
defaultare
default required to really make a difference
default. S
defaultupport for the retrofit market will 
defaultalso 
defaultbe needed if 
defaultthe 
defaultGovernment 
defaultis 
defaultserious about community heating over the longer term. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPolicy stability is a
defaultlso crucial. We are disappointed with the recent removal of the CCL exemption (LECs) for CHP
default,
default particularly in light of assurances previously given as to its continuance
default. This has severely undermined recent investment in CHP and is likely to reduce new inve
defaultstment in CHP as future investors may view any future policy as unstable as a result. Government should replace the CCL levy exemption for both new and existing CHP plant with a mechanism of equivalent value.
default&#xa0;
defaultTo date, the market has been driven to a large
default extent by 
defaultforward thinking 
defaultlocal authorities, using local plans as a key tool for requiring developments in the local area to incorporate energy efficiency and carbon targets within their schemes. 
defaultA strong planning framework is essential to driving the ri
defaultght type of behaviour for the devel
defaultopment of new build properties
default. T
defaultherefore a 
defaultstronger planning framework within which to take schemes forward is a key issue to address. 
defaultOur concern is that
default,
default even in light of the Coalition’s reiterated commitment to Zero C
defaultarbon Homes from 2016, the recently announced 
default2014 
defaultPart L Building Regulations
default,
default combined with the current Department of Community and Local Government proposals to simplify housing standards, risk holding up the deployment and expansion of district heating
default schemes. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are
default extremely
default concerned that
default 
defaultthe
default potential 
defaultrepealing
default of
default powers available to local authorities under the Planning and Energy Act 2008
default, which enable 
defaultlocal authorities to specify energy requirements on new build properties
default, 
defaultcould
default 
defaultweaken the ab
defaultility of a local authority to encourage the growth and expansion of district heating schemes
default. The application of such powers (informed by a cost benefit analysis) play
defaults
default an important role in nurturing the development of community energy schemes. 
defaultIf planning
default does not take a strong position now, our concern is that the capability and innovation being seen within the market today will fall away, resulting in costs rising in the future
default.
default 
defaultTherefore, there is a risk that the 
defaultUK
default could miss out on a deploying a futur
defaulte proofed, low carbon infrastructure today which can provide lower energy costs and carbon benefits in the future.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultTable of parameters for 
defaultsome domestic heating technologies in ESME:
defaultTechnology
defaultEfficiency for 2010 vintage technology
defaultCapex
default (£/kW)
defaultLifetime
defaultBiomass Boiler
default87% 
default528
default15 years
defaultElectric Resistive Heating
default90%
default175
default15 years
defaultGas Boiler
default87%
default167
default15 years
defaultASHP
default208%
default600
default20 years
defaultGSHP
default315%
default1200
default20 years
defaultMicro CHP
default78% (for heat and 
defaultelec
default)
default3500
default15 years
defaultSolar thermal
default50%
default~ 1600
default20 years
default&#xa0;
defaultIf we install low carbon electric heat pumps we also need to consider the peak carbon emissions associated with peak generation periods which tend to 
defaultbe high carbon; this leads to the hybrid scenario with gas boilers taking peak for a very long time.  It also contradicts DECC
default’s
default simplistic approach to H
defaulteat 
defaultP
defaultump
default design which is actually counter-productive and discourages smart control of H
defaulteat 
defaultP
defaultumps
default.  Esse
defaultntially you cannot examine a technology in isolation from 
defaultthe 
defaultsystem
default within which it operates.
defaultCooling
default should be treated 
defaultcomparably 
defaultto other energy services
default 
defaultgiven
default 
defaultit 
defaultprovides similar benefits as heat
default,
default albeit to a different market.  The primary use for base load chill will be that 
defaultof
default continuous temperature control
default,
default such as for refrigeration of perishable goods (
defaultfor example 
defaultour
default CHP asset 
defaultCitigen
default supplies Smithfield marke
defaultt) and data rooms where IT equipment generate a significant amount of heat
default. 
defaultBased on 
defaultour
default experiences at 
defaultour 
defaultCitigen
default site,
default there is a growing demand for chill in the commercial sector due to the modern design of office buildings
default where
default heat is retained within these buildings which creates a requirement for space cooling in the 
defaultsummer
default.  From a scheme such as 
defaultCitigen
default, developers are looking for a dual supply of heat in the winter and cooling in the summer to their developments. Cooling ca
defaultn be provided either from electric chillers or by using heat as an energy input into an absorption 
defaultchiller
default which then produces cooling as an output.  
defaultTheoretically the same waste heat from a CHP unit can supply the same building with pure heat in the wint
defaulter and then as an energy input to generate cooling in the summer.  Hence there is an argument that
default,
default given the similarities between heat and cooling
default,
default they should be subject to the same treatment, although 
defaultwe would not
default foresee a domestic market for cooling o
defaultr 
defaultwidespread 
defaultsignificant opportunities for cooling networks such as the 4km cooling network at 
defaultCitigen
default.
defaultThe tariff levels were not sufficient to promote effective deployment of the technology.
defaultHeat pumps are an effective way of helping to meet the EU renewable targets by displacing fossil and oil-fuelled heat with renewable heat, with a relatively modest increase in electricity demand.
default O
defaultnce the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) is introduced for th
defaulte domestic 
defaultmarket next year, we believe this market will grow, in particular providing 
defaultoff gas grid 
defaultconsumers with a real alternative to oil and LPG boilers. If installed correctly and the user is trained adequately, the returns for both the customer, and 
defaultcarbon savings, can be 
defaultattractive
default. 
defaultFor example, when compared to an LPG boiler, a customer living in an average three bed semi-detached house with a ground source heat pump would save £435 and 1.75t of carbon, equivalent to 45% carbon savings. For the sam
defaulte property type with an air-source heat pump the saving would be £300, or 1.4t of carbon, equivalent to 30% savings. 
defaultWe supported the recent Government consultation which 
defaultproposed changes to the tariff levels for heat pumps; this is necessary to bring abo
defaultut a more suitable level of deployment.
defaultWe also are pleased that there has been recognition of the benefits of combined heating and cooling systems for GS
defaultHP.
default 
defaultThe
default proposed
default removal of the banding helps as it does not create an artificial market where organisations size the pump to fit in with the tariff structure, but rather seeks to meet the needs of the customer.
default The proposed 
defaultt
defaultiering
default in our view will preven
defaultt gaming and should mean that financial modelling will be 
defaultsimpler
default, a benefit as it will create downside protection for the finance community, helping to increase the likelihood of securing funding.
defaultIn 2012 E.ON announced that it would be working with Sains
defaultbury and Geothermal 
defaultI
defaultnternational to roll out the first phase of an innovative energy solution to up to 100 stores, using renewable energy from deep underground to provide energy efficient heating, hot water and cooling. 
defaultThe proposal was that b
defaultoth Geothermal International and E.ON would be working with Sainsbury’s to install and operate geo-thermal heat pump technology, with the scheme aiming to deliver up to 100MW of renewable energy sources in supermarkets by the end of 2016. Whilst we were ab
defaultle to deliver some of this ambitious project, the funding the RHI provided was not sufficient to carry on with this project. 
defaultChanges to the tariff are needed if the 
defaultRHI 
defaultis
default to promote heat pumps successfully
default. 
defaultWe hope that the proposed tariff increase will p
defaultrevent 
defaultprojects 
defaultsuch as these from 
defaulthaving to be discontinued
default in the future.
defaultThe RHI remains a key policy tool for tackling carbon emissions and striving towards achieving the EU requirement that
default 
default15% of final energy consumption should come from renewable energy sources by 2020
default. 
defaultWe hope it will be successful
default at a domestic level, 
defaultand believe that the proposed tariffs will lead to significant interest. We support Government’s intention 
defaultto target the 
defaultresidential market predominately at ‘
defaultoff-gas grid
default’ households
default. 
defaultWhilst the delays in implementing the RHI domestic scheme will have impacted the market,
default if designed properly
default,
default we would expect to see innovation
default and customer take
default-
defaultup of the propositions
default.
defaultThermal storage is a key part of an integrated city wid
defaulte heating solution
default and is common
defaultplace in countries such as De
defaultn
defaultmark and Sweden. Incorporating thermal storage into district heating 
defaultsystems 
defaultwhich utilise gas fired CHP enables these assets to provide demand response and capacity provision of electricity at
default times of system imbalance. This also works the other way round when the CHP can be turned off to respond to over capacity in the system and the heat which has stored in the thermal store can be released to meet heating demand. The Government needs to do m
defaultore to encourage and support the deployment of thermal storage.
defaultSeptember 
default2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttps://www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/files/archives/Smart%20City%20Intelligent%20Energy%20Opportunities.pdf
default