&#xa0;
defaultThe Institute of Health and Society (IHS) is part of the Faculty of Medical Sciences
default (FMS)
default at Newcastle University.  
defaultOur vision is to transform the health of individuals and populations thr
defaultough pioneering translational research and education in public health, health services research and health-related social science.
default  
defaultIHS is committed to providing a good working environment for its staff and 
defaulti
defaultn 2011 this commitment was endorsed with a silver Athena SWAN award. This national award recognises good employment practice and the promotion of women working in science, engineering and technology. This level of award particularly acknowledges significan
defaultt and sustained progression and achievement in promoting gender equality. IHS 
defaultwas
default the first academic department at Newcastle University to achieve this status.
default  
default 
defaultWe decided to submit evidence to the 
defaultCommittee to share our experiences as part of our wider c
defaultommitment to promoting women working in STEM careers.
defaultIHS has been very successful in attracting and recruiting 
defaultwomen.  For all academic and research positions available during the period 2008-1010, the proportion of women receiving offers a
defaults a percentage of all applications has increased.
default  Overall, the Institute employs more women than men
default,
default and women are represented at all grades.
default  Until 2010, 
defaultthere was a gender imbalance at senior level with more men in senior positions (grades H and I) unt
defaultil the promotion of four women to professor. 
default78% of leavers from the IHS in the last three years were women although in real terms this is still a small number (24). This compares to 74% of the overall staff being women. The highest turnover is within lect
defaulturer grade F; this group 
defaultis
default more likely to be affected by the ending of a fixed-term contract. The reason for people on this grade leaving varies from wanting to travel, to returning to their home country, to taking up a post in another university. Althoug
defaulth many staff at this grade are initially appointed on short-term contracts, the IHS has an internal redeployment policy which means that people are generally leaving of their own accord and for positive reasons. However, in an attempt to collect more infor
defaultmation on why staff are leaving, we now carry out exit interviews with members of staff before they leave to identify any recurrent issues or problem areas.
default  W
defaulte have
default also
default identified a number of challenges to the retention/promotion of women in academic car
defaulteers and have developed
default some solutions.  Our action plan has been underpinned by a strong and enlightened leadership team committed to equality for all.
defaultWe operate an internal redeployment system for research
default staff;
default a
defaultll research staff within six months of the end of their contract are reviewed by our HR committee 
defaultto discuss ongoing contracts. If no further contract is available, 
defaulttheir skills 
defaultare 
defaultmatched to available posts
default within IHS. This offers continuity in 
defaultemployment and further security.
defaultFunders also have a responsibility here. For example, some research funders do not pay maternity leave 
defaultso this falls back to the Institution. There also needs to be more work done to enable maternity cover to be considered 
defaultif appropriate.
defaultI
defaultncreasing the number of part-time posts at lecturer
default level G has made it easier for women to apply for promotion
default.  Having more staff working less than full-time makes it 
defaultmore acceptable.
defaultIt is recognised that female members of staff may wait longer to apply for promotion than their male 
defaultcolleagues.  We discovered 
defaulta perception among younger female members of the IHS staff that a period of m
defaultaternity leave has to be ‘made up’ before they can compete on equal terms with men. We are addressing this perception through the annual Performance and Development Review Process (PDR) to emphasise that promotion is based on merit not length of time in po
defaultst.  
defaultAll staff have the opportunity to discuss promotion as part of their PDR and are updated annually 
defaulton the criteria required.  In addition to the manager carrying out the PDR, the Institute Director also 
defaultsigns-off
default every 
defaultPDR 
defaultto enable her to identify any
default suitable candidates who may have been missed.
defaultIHS initiated and designed a training course for Principal Investigators which has been adopted by 
defaultthe FMS
default as a beacon of best practice. IHS was chosen by the FMS to pilot its mentoring programme and a number of staff have now had the opportunity to be trained as mentors. Both schemes have proved successful among all staff grades. 
default 
defaultHowever, females entering se
defaultnior positions have identified the need for leadership training. Whilst the IHS supports staff members to attend external courses e.g. NHS Public Health Leadership course, we 
defaulthave
default also developed leadership training courses specifically for both senior and 
defaultjunior staff which are currently being rolled-out.
defaultIHS has a ‘buddy’ system for all new staff; this is someone usually of equivalent grade who has been working in the IHS for some time. The ‘buddy’ is assigned for two weeks d
defaulturing which they introduce new staff members to key staff at all grades including the Institute director, as well as showing them around the University and taking them to the coffee/lunch area to provide further opportunity for networking. Although formall
defaulty this relationship only lasts a short period, it generally leads to an on-going friendship which means that people always have somebody to go to with a query in the early days. In addition the new staff member is introduced to key people in the building f
defaultor obtaining information and advice about health &amp; safety, university policies on sickness absence, holiday entitlement, dignity at work etc.  This ‘buddy’ system is also offered to all new PhD students and we offer a longer period of this informal support
default to overseas postgraduate students who feel
default this would be useful.
defaultEqual representation of male and female staff of committees enhances the visibility of women and can demonstrate a commitment to equality.  
defaultCommittee rep
defaultresentation within the IHS is wide and varied since staff are encouraged to sit on committees both within and outside the University. Within the Institute, the IHS Executive is selected from the most senior members of staff each of whom has a specific area
default of responsibility. For other groups representatives might be selected with a view to enhancing their CV with an eye on promotion prospects. The University asks for volunteers to sit on various committees and names are submitted by the IHS director. The ch
defaultoice of people on these committees will be governed by 
defaultthe need for a spread of representatives across University Faculties and takes into account gender balance.
defaultIHS has regular discussion forum meetings where less established research and academic staff are encouraged to present their work. These are held at lunchtime to ensure all staff have the opportunity to attend. The external seminar prog
defaultramme similarly is held within normal working hours and, if held in the afternoon, ends by 5pm to allow staff with childcare responsibilities to leave in good time. Institute meetings are held on a Wednesday as we have found this to be the day on which mos
defaultt part-time staff work. We do not hold meetings before 9am as we recognise that not all staff would be able to attend.
defaultWe positively encourage celebrating good news e.g. births and achievements. We
default have a central area where staff can have coffee/lunch which allows for informal networking. Coffee and lunch breaks are positively encouraged and we regularly support charity initiatives. We host a lunch for all new MSc students to meet IHS staff. The Chr
defaultistmas party, to which all staff 
defaultand students 
defaultare invited, starts at lunchtime so that staff with childcare responsibilities can attend and still meet these. Due regard is given to language used and respect is shown to people from different cultures includ
defaulting identifying a place to pray for Muslim members of staff. Any untoward behaviour would be dealt with under the University’s Dignity at Work policy which all staff are aware of. We have a Dignity at Work volunteer based in the IHS and the Institute manag
defaulter
defaultIHS has considerable experience of staff taking maternity leave. Of these, one woman chose not to return to work which gives a return to work rate of 78.6%.  Women from all 
defaultgrades have taken maternity leave and a number of senior academics have had several periods of maternity leave. The one member of staff (grade F) who did not return to work after taking maternity leave relocated to another area of the country.
default  
defaultWe also off
defaulter a phased return to work to aid in the transition back to work.
default 
defaultPaternity leave is offered to all new dads. Two male members of staff (one senior lecturer and one research associate) have taken paternity leave over the past three years. One female member
default of staff has taken parental leave on two occasions to cover school holidays. This part-time member of staff commented that the IHS’ flexibility over working hours has considerably reduced her stress levels at times e.g. when children are ill.   No request
defaults for adoption leave have been received but this is available to all staff. Information on all policies is readily available on the IHS intranet. 
default 
defaultFlexible working is available to all IHS staff in agreement with 
defaultthe Institute director. Three part-time members of staff (senior lecturers) currently work flexibly by working extra hours during term time so they can spend more time with their children in the school holidays. Others (research associates) have altered th
defaulteir working patterns to work longer days so as to be able to spend more time with their children or to pick them up from school on certain days and others have phased their return to work after maternity leave by returning part-time (lecturer) and graduall
defaulty reverting back to full-time working.
default 
defaultAcademic staff at
default all grades and both genders are able to work flexibly with regard to hours of working. There is provision for working from home for some part of the week. 
default However, IHS recognises that a
defaults the Institu
defaultte has a large number of 
defaultsupport staff who are unable to work as flexibly, it is important for their morale that they see the academics on a regular basis so that the team cohesiveness and common purpose of the Institute are maintained. Discussion about fl
defaultexible working often forms part of the recruitment process and the IHS tries to meet requests for flexibility where it can.
defaultDuring the period 2008-2010
default,
default 24 women and seven men left IHS. Eleven women left at the end of fixed-term contracts, six moved to take up a promotion, two returned to their career posts after working and studyin
defaultg in the Institute for a period of time, one re-located for career and family reasons, one left to complete her PhD, one retired, one left after maternity leave and one left for work/life balance reasons. Of the men who left, one was head-hunted by another
default university to lead a new research programme, three left to take up promotion, two to return to their career posts after studying and working in the Institute for a period of time and one re-located abroad. 
default  No particular areas of attrition have be found 
defaultin IHS.
defaultThe Government should continue to support women by protecting their rights to maternity leave and flexible working in law.  The Government should 
defaultalso consider becoming a role model for equality in the workplace by improving working conditions for 
defaultstaff at Westminster
default, for example adopting more family-friendly working hours.
defaultAcademic institutions could:
default10
default&#xa0;
default