&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultthe defaultCambridge Association for Womendefault in Science and Engineering (Cambridge defaultAWiSEdefault) (WSC033)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultCambridge 
defaultAWiSE
default 
defaultwas originally set up in 1994 as a local branch of 
defaultAWiSE
default. It had an active programme of events, and was primarily academic in focus. 
defaultThe organisation
default was expanded in 2004 to provide greater local support and networking opportunities for women in SET in both industry and academia in Cambridgeshire and beyond. Cambridge 
defaultAWiSE
default&#xa0;
default is a voluntary organisation run by a Steering Group
default and a paid
default coordinator
default; membership currently stands at about 100 members, and the events programme for 2013-14 includes around 15 events.
default Events are open to non-members as well as members.
defaultThe Select Committee’s Inquiry into Women in STEM Careers focuses on one of C
defaultambridge 
defaultAWiSE’s
default core concerns, hence our interest in submitting this evidence.
defaultWe held a networking event on July 10
defaultth
default 
default2013
default, and asked the attendees to consider the 
defaultfour 
defaultquestions 
defaultat the heart of the inquiry. 
defaultThese were adapted slightly so as 
defaultto include non-academic careers and employers. 
defaultThe following paragraphs provide a summary of the responses received.
default4a. P
defaultressure of balancing family and work commitments. 
defaultAs women progress in STEM careers, the responsibilities diversify (research, teaching, clinical, administration, committees, etc.) and increase, limiting the flexibility and
default amount of time available for fa
defaultmily commitments. The lack of part-time positions, flexible working, or job
default-
defaultsharing positions was a key factor that affects the ability of women to progress in STEM careers. When flexible work arrangements do exist, they are not fully considered in the wor
defaultk timetables. Networking events often occur after work hours, conflicting with family commitments. 
default4b. Career breaks
defaultCareer breaks for maternity leave and other family responsibilities tend to limit an individual’s publication rate, which affects tenure r
defaulteviews and grant applications. Also, during a career break, it is difficult to keep track of the developments and contacts in the individual’s STEM field of expertise. If the career break takes place during a grant period, then it could negatively affect t
defaulthe annual performance on the grant and the ability to obtain new research grants, especially in large multi-organizational ones.
default4c. Monetary factors 
defaultThe effort put into careers by women can be less financially rewarded than for men. Due to the lack of 
defaultpositions available for progression in STEM careers and the high level of competition for those positions, women may decide to take a more secure position outside of STEM careers. Financial and job insecurity due to short-term postdoctoral contracts is pro
defaultblematic as child care requires a permanent income. Also, if both carers are working, then finding affordable, reliable child care is another issue.
default4d. Culture of exclusion
defaultA few comments highlighted the established network amongst male colleagues and the
default culture of exclusion for women in some STEM careers. It was mentioned that perhaps women communicate differently from men and may have to learn the established hierarchical thinking and power structure.
default4e. Image of women scientists in 
defaultthe 
defaultmedia
default and the a
defaultrts
defaultResponses pointed to the lack of women role models in higher levels of STEM careers and suggested more proactive mentoring programs to encourage young females who are interested in STEM. However, these role models need to be positive ones as some estab
defaultlished female workers, classified with “Queen Bee syndrome”, make it more difficult for other females due to their own difficult experience obtaining their position.
default5a. New careers 
defaultWhen women leave STEM positions, they transition into a diversity of other positions. One category is 
defaultpeople-oriented positions, including teaching, public engagement, science outreach, administration, helpline management, career advising, child-care or house-wife positions. Another is applied research positions, including industrial research roles, lab ma
defaultnagement, technician positions, sales and marketing. Others move into careers with more financial security, such as 
defaultproject management, patent law, publishing, politics, accounting, political lobbying and advising as well as scientific or management consul
defaultting. Finally, women sometimes choose careers with more flexibility and opportunities by transitioning to self-employment, entrepreneurship, private consultancy, scientific writing, and interim roles such as maternity cover positions.
default5b. Consequences
defaultThes
defaulte are three-fold; the transition affects the individual, the STEM career workplaces and the alternative employment 
defaultpositions. The
default new employers receive scientifically trained employees who tend to be skilled in some or all of the following: problem-solving
default, analysis, team-building, leadership, public-speaking, management, understanding of scientific methods and personnel. However, in leaving STEM careers, these employees may lose their skills that are specific to their field of expertise and encounter reduc
defaulted opportunities for applying their specific talents, training and experiences in their new roles. The transition may require a fast learning-curve in an unfamiliar work environment, resulting in less confident employees, lower qualified positions, and low
defaulter salaries for these employees. For STEM career workplaces, the transition contributes to a distinct lack of diversity and female role models in top STEM positions.
default&#xa0;
default6a. Support for career progression
defaultEmployers should provide women graduates and PhD students with strong encouragement and support for career progression through effective mentoring an
defaultd personal development, enabling them to build on qualifications and technical experience to be able to move into new roles within an organisation. Many women would like to have more on-the-job coaching and training, for example in people management in ord
defaulter to have the possibility of progressing into management roles that use and extend their technical knowledge. Transferable skills developed during degree and postgraduate work, such as project management, need to be better recognised and valued by employe
defaultrs so that women can be encouraged to apply for senior roles and eventual progression onto board positions. More senior technically-trained women in an organisation provide role models for retention of women graduate students. 
default6b. Flexibility
defaultMany women g
defaultraduates and PhD students wish to remain or progress in technically oriented employment but with flexibility for part-time working and family commitments. These positions need to be more readily available and better valued in an organisation. Longer-term c
defaultontracts for new PhD graduates in research roles would provide better job stability and security to develop and progress a career. Employers need to provide better support for access to child-care, job-sharing, flexible and phased return to work and option
defaults for working from home to accommodate caring responsibilities.
default6c. Financial factors
defaultIt goes without saying that employers must establish equal pay for equal positions, and pay postgraduate students a living wage equivalent to their skill level.
default6d. Examp
defaultles of good practice
defaultGlasgow Veterinary School and 
defaultBoehringer
default 
defaultIngelheim
default were cited as examples of good practice. In addition, the 
defaultWellcome
default Trust offers fellowships targeting career breaks, and has local childcare 
defaultfacilities at its campus near Cambridge. Th
defaulte Daphne Jackson Trust was also highlighted for its fellowships (though not an employer as such)      
default7a. Legislation 
defaultLegislation could be introduced to limit the use of short term contracts, and/or require women's participation in management roles (e.g. quotas).  The government could also set an example by making more women visible in senior ministerial and civil service
default positions (offering realistic female role models), and advocating, perhaps through a media campaign, retention and diversity as economic drivers (research shows mixed teams are more productive than single sex teams). 
default7b. Policy
defaultThe Government could
default adopt and promote 
defaultmore 
defaultpolicies and programmes around childcare and parenting, in the form of subsidised childcare (not only for early years), tax relief, or child care loans, funding for childcare at conferences, and improving the system for paternity le
defaultave and fathers' time off. 
default&#xa0;
default7c. Funding
defaultSupport, through funding and/or other means, 
defaultshould be provided 
defaultfor organisations and programmes that support women in STEM. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThese 
defaultcould
default include Women in STEM associations (like 
defaultAWiSE
default), mentoring
default programmes
default, person
defaultal development training, specialised careers advice, and support for career breaks and training. 
default&#xa0;
default7d. 
defaultChanging a
defaultttitudes
defaultIt is important that the Government works to change negative attitudes towards working mothers and part-time working (for both men and
default women), and promotes the value society holds for both men and women in family life.
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default