&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by TCPA (HOT37)default&#xa0;
default1. default              defaultAbout the TCPAdefault              default defaultThe Town and 
defaultCountry Planning Association (TCPA) is an independent charity working to improve the art and science of town and country planning. The TCPA puts social justice and the environment at the heart of policy debate and inspires government, industry and campaign
defaulters to take a fresh perspective on major issues, including planning policy, housing, regeneration and climate change. Our objectives are to:
default&#xa0;
default2. default              defaultTCPA rdefaultesponsedefaultThe TCPA 
defaulthas chosen to respond solely to
default the question 
default‘Why is community heating/CHP not more common in the UK?’ 
defaultThrough leading two Intelligent Energy Europe
default (IEE)
default projects 
defaultthe Association has
default become aware of the vast differences between the UK and other European countries in terms of 
defaultthe use of community and district heating as well as CHP. 
default&#xa0;
default2.default1default The positive role of planning in delivering community defaultheatingdefaultPlanning can play a key role in deli
defaultvering community 
defaultheating
default. Through the work of 
defaultthe 
defaultTCPA and Friends of the Earth led 
defaultPlanning and Climate Change Coalition
default we have explored the ways in which planning policies can support 
defaultcommunity heating and CHP
default. Our 
defaultPlanning for climate change - guidance for local authorities
default 
defaultwhich was published following the National Planning Policy Framework in April 20
default12, sets out
default 
defaultbest practice policies for plan making and development management, as well as highlighting the importance of evidence gathering. 
default&#xa0;
default2.default2default Lessons from defaultour defaultEuropedefaultan projectsdefaultThe TCPA 
defaultcurrently 
defaultleads two Intelligent Energy Europe 
defaultp
defaultrojects which bot
defaulth champion the positive role of planning in the delivery of community 
defaultheating and CHP
default. 
defaultLeadership for Energy Action and Planning
default (LEAP) has been established to facilitate a network of pan-European municipalities to plan and deliver local sustainable energy solutions in line with the Covenant of Mayors. A partnership of ten organisations from seven European Union (EU) countries have
default come together to improve their capacity as key actors in speeding up the local uptake of sustainable energy measures and the move towards a low-carbon local economy. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe project highlights case studies of how local authorities can work in partnership to
default help community groups deliver community 
defaultheating
default schemes. The project also focusses on the key role of the Sustainable Energy Action Plan (SEAP) in delivering these objectives.
default&#xa0;
defaultA recently published 
defaultCase 
defaultStudies Paper
default from the LEAP p
defaultroject 
defaultsets out four key recommendations to ensuring greater deployment of decentralized energy, including district heating/ CHP, as follows:
default&#xa0;
defaultThe TCPA’s second Intelligent Energy Europe
default funded
default project is 
defaultSpatial Planning and Energy for Communities In All Landscapes
default (SPECIAL). The three year project started in March 2013 and focus
defaultes
default on training planners to link spatial planning and energy. Spatial planning and urb
defaultan planners have a pivotal role in developing energy strategies and action plans, and the SPECIAL project has been set up to help bridge the gap between climate change/energy action planning and spatial and urban planning. The project will address the barr
defaultiers 
defaultto 
defaulthaving a positive and holistic regulatory framework in place, and the importance of creating energy opportunity maps, based on sound evidence bases, which can direct community groups to the most appropriate locations for community 
defaultheating
default projects.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs part of 
defaultthe TCPA’s
default 
defaulttraining for the SPECIAL project 
defaultthe Association and project partners have 
defaultvisited developments in Sweden where district heating is the most common source of heating for apartments and commercial buildings, whilst it is also used fo
defaultr detached homes to a lesser extent. During a training week in the UK 
defaultthe project partnership
default 
defaultvisited the CHP scheme in central Milton Keynes operated by Thameswey Central Milton Keynes Ltd
default. This exemplified some of the challenges and opportunities of esta
defaultblishing a district scale CHP scheme in the UK.
default Set up in 2005, 
defaultthe Milton Keynes scheme 
defaultrequired a partnership with English Partnerships (
defaultnow the 
defaultHCA) and 
defaultbenefited from the
default agency
default being both the planning authority and landowner
default. It took place 
defaultahead of ma
defaultinstream planning policy for district heating in Milton Keynes. However, the Council now has a Core Strategy Policy on 
default‘
defaultCommunity Energy Networks and Large Scale Renewable Energy Schemes
default’
default, where it 
defaultpromote
defaults
default the use of renewable energy schemes 
defaultthat can 
defaultdemonstrate
default that there will not be any negative social, economic, or environmental
default 
defaultresults from the scheme.
default 
defaultThe Council also has the following requirements:
default1. For developments of more than 100 homes, applications should show that the
default 
defaultpotential for communi
defaultty energy networks has been explored
default2. For development of more than 200 homes, applications will require community
default 
defaultenergy networks, unless it can be proven that this is not feasible on technical or
default 
defaulteconomic grounds
default3. Regardless of the number of homes in 
defaulta proposal, where an existing local energy
default 
defaultnetwork is established, developments will be expected to connect to the
default 
defaultnetwork, if feasible
default&#xa0;
defaultThe TCPA believe
defaults 
defaultspatial planning has a key role to play in identifying suitable locations for the installation of dis
defaulttrict heating and CHP. Through energy opportunity mapping and heat mapping planners can spatially map demand, capacity and constraints. 
defaultAs the above example illustrates t
defaulthey can also require new developments to consider installing district heating systems,
default or require them to connect to existing ones.    
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Planning and Climate Change Coalition (April 2012) 
defaulthttp://www.tcpa.org.uk/data/files/PCC_Guide_April_2012.pdf
default 
default LEAP project (2013) 
defaulthttp://leap-eu.org/
default 
default SPECIAL project (2013) 
defaulthttp://www.tcpa.org.uk/resources.php?action=resource&amp;id=1134
default 
default