              
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Mitsubishi Electric UK (HOT38)defaultSummarydefaultThe publication of the revised Heat Strategy in March 2013 has caused industry to re-evaluate the Government’s approach to reducing carbon emissions 
defaultfrom heating and the likely deployment of renewable energy efficiency measures. In the coming months, the Domestic Renewable Heat Incentive provides an exciting opportunity to encourage consumers to take action in their own homes.
defaultOver the past few years t
defaulthere have been many developments outside of the policy sphere which make this inquiry particularly timely. These include:
defaultAs a
default manufacturer
default in the UK
default, it is our view
default 
defaultthat renewa
defaultble heating technologies offer a net benefit to UK PLC both in terms of long-term sustainability and carbon emissions reduction. There is also increasingly convincing data to show that investment in renewable technology and energy efficiency- the low carbo
defaultn agenda- will 
defaultover time 
defaultoffer better cost savings and lower fuel bills to consumers, as well as ensuring that the Government meets its legally binding 
defaultrenewable
default targets.
defaultThere is much to be positive about in terms of managing the UK’s future heating requi
defaultrements. The expected launch of the Renewable Heat Incentive in spring 2014, with new tariffs for the existing commercial scheme and the first domestic tariffs, will bring a welcome boost to the growing renewable heating market in the UK. In addition, the 
defaultability to link the Green Deal with the Renewable Heat Incentive would enable 
defaultmore innovative finance packages
default which could see free renewable heating systems installed into consumers’ homes. 
defaultHowever there have been some recent disappointments. The updated
default Building Regulations, for instance, will include no renewable heating technologies in its Part L requirements, and only the minimum possible requirements for energy efficiency measures. 
defaultOutside of DECC, other 
defaultGovernment 
defaultdepartments 
defaultmust ensure
default they listen
default to a 
defaultwider 
defaultrange of industry voices
default when taking policy decisions
default. On a positive note, the consultation on Community Energy has allowed us to make the case for the inclusion of heat pumps in any future strategy
default 
default- as we 
defaultare already installing our technology
default into communal heating schemes such as multiple occupancy social housing projects in urban centres. 
defaultIn conclusion, Mitsubishi Electric is broadly supportive of the Government’s current position and policy mix for heat decarbonisation. However, our optimis
defaultm is tempered by caution. Views held within DECC are not necessarily supported elsewhere in Government and policies such as the Renewable Heat Incentive must be implemented and subsequently promoted effectively.
defaultAbout Mitsubishi Electric UKdefaultWe are a
default global producer of energy efficient and renewable technologies for the generation of both heat and power; we are a UK market leader in the manufacturer of Air Source Heat Pumps (ASHP) and Ground Source Heat Pumps (GSHP) for domestic and commercial applica
defaulttion. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMitsubishi Electric’s manufacturing factory in Livingston Scotland employs over 400 people and the factory produces 3,000 award winning Ecodan air source heat pump units each year. This factory has the potential to produce over 10,000 products a ye
defaultar if demand allows. As well as our manufacturing plant in Livingston, our main office is based in Hatfield, and regional support operations employ over 400 people and house many rece
defaultntly renovated training centres.
default&#xa0;defaultResponse to questionsdefault default1.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIs the governmendefaultt taking the right approach to reduce heat energy demand?default&#xa0;
defaultThe current strategy towards reducing heat energy demand in the UK is to tackle both supply and demand of heating; we broadly agree with the Government’s approach to roll out energy efficiency meas
defaultures, increase the deployment of renewable heating technologies, and seek to alter consumer behaviour. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is also appropriate to distinguish between technologies and industry sectors; the updated Heat Strategy of March 2013 highlighted different 
defaultapproaches for heating across domestic, industrial and community heating sectors. This is because many technologies are designed specifically for particular markets. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMitsubishi Electric heat pumps, for example, are modular systems which must be correctly
default specified for each property’s heat demand. Therefore, heat pump units and heat pump systems which are specified for commercial buildings tend to be much larger than the smallest 5-10kW domestic heat pump installation.
default&#xa0;
defaultFinally, while we agree broadly with the Government’s approach to reducing heat energy demand, it is important to note that the Heat Strategy, Energy Efficiency Strategy, and other relevant policies must not become overly prescriptive about solutions for d
defaultecarbonisation and demand reduction. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAn example would be the current approach to Community Energy in the Heat Strategy, and the proposed Community Energy Strategy which is out for consultation at present. Both these documents imply a vision of community 
defaultheating which is largely powered by large scale biomass or, more often, micro combined heat and power (mCHP) technologies. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever we believe that there 
defaultare other innovative solutions 
defaultfor community and collective heating coming forward. We routinely inst
defaultall heat pump systems into multiple occupancy 
defaultbuildings and have performed research which suggests that a collective heat pump system can offer consumer savings and encourage behavioural change. 
default&#xa0;
default2.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat progress is the government making on reducing the demadefaultnd for heat?default&#xa0;
defaultWe recognise Government efforts to promote heat reduction, and believe that positive steps for the delivery of heat demand reduction have been made. The production of the strategy documents for Heat and for Energy 
defaultEfficiency
default and the open Cons
defaultultation on Community Energy Strategy are all 
defaultsensible and comprehensive documents. From an over-arching policy point of view, therefore, the Government has taken several progressi
defaultve steps to deliver its agenda. 
defaultHowever, there have been significant delays 
defaultto the key policie
defaults which aim to drive the strategic frameworks established by these overarching Government strategies. In particular, the Renewable Heat Incentive is now three years behind its originally proposed implementation date; with the domestic sch
defaulteme and the revised non-domestic tariffs both due to
default come into force in April 2013. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIndustry confidence has been damaged by the delays to the policy, and will inevitably delay scaling-up supply chains until they have certainty over final tariffs and impl
defaultementation dates. 
defaultThe impact that policy announcements have on the market can be seen from the Ofgem RHI deployment figures; there was a 90% increase in enquiries about the RHI to Ofgem in Jan-March 2013, the quarter after the September 2012 consultations 
default(which closed in December 2012) and a three times
default increase in
default the number of RHI payments made (£5.1m to £1.5m). 
default&#xa0;
defaultI
defaultt is very important that the Government keep t
defaulto their projected timelines. In particular, Air to Water Heat Pumps were originally consulted upon in the New Technologies consultation of September 2012, in what was understood to be a “fast track” to their integration into the RHI scheme. However, a prop
defaultosed tariff for Air Heat Pumps in the commercial scheme was only recently announced (of 2.5p/kWh). With commercial installations taking up to 6 months to specify and agree, it is vital that the Government announces this as the final tariff level in the aut
defaultumn, so that we can be ready to install the first new commercial air 
defaultto water 
defaultheat pumps in spring 2014.  
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, the Green Deal, the Government’s flagship energy efficiency scheme for the domestic market (at present) has also had a low
default uptake again
defaultst its projections (just over 300 Green Deal Plans are planned or pending as of July 2013, see below).
default Similarly, the Building Regulations- which will drive energy efficiency in the new build sector- have recently been announced as favouring the least stri
defaultngent
default option for the new Part L regulations. With the second Phase of ECO under cons
defaultultation, it is important that 
defaultboth
default DCLG and DECC
default rem
defaultain
default committed to driving improved energy efficiency across the UK building stock and reflects this in regulation going 
defaultforward. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default3.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultBiomass is deemed a key fuel for heat production from both the cost and GHG perspectives. What should be done to ensure methods of calculating biomass GHG balance represent an accurate picture?defaultNo Comment
default4.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere are sustainability guidelines defaultfor biomass, do these go far enough?defaultNo Comment
default&#xa0;default5.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat will the local environmental impact (for example air pollution) be from the use heat generation in urban areas, for example CHP units?default&#xa0;
defaultWe have no comment on air pollution impacts of future heat generat
defaultion technologies. However, we can comment on the issue of neighbourhood noise pollution. In January 2013, DCLG wrote to stakeholders about revising the permitted development rights for heat pump and micro wind turbine installations. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIndustry welcomed thi
defaults decision, as in order to meet the current 42dB threshold for noise, the majority of ASHP installations have to be installed several meters away from the nearest dwelling or go through the additional process of applying for planning permission. We have fo
defaultund this unnecessarily burdensome, particularly as the RHI specifically targets small urban properties for the increased deployment of air source heat pump installations. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, industry-led research from 2011 under the Freedom of Information Act d
defaultiscovered that between 1 January 2008, and the 31
defaultst
default December 2011, only 0.08% of domestic ASHP installations resulted in a noise complaint across all 364 Local Councils in the UK.
default It was our recommendation that the 42dB limit was sufficient, and could be raised to 45dB without negatively impacting neighbourhood noise levels.
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultIndustry’s recommendation to DCLG was therefore that the noise limit for air source heat pumps was suffic
defaultient at 42dB, and could afford to be raised to 45dB without impacting on neighbourhood noise pollution. This would offer a more realistic reflection of heat pump noise levels. 
default&#xa0;
default6.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat are the relative merits of using gas to directly provide space heating codefaultmpared to centralised electricity production plus domestic heat pumps? default&#xa0;
defaultThe Government’s Heat Strategy makes clear that the UK’s renewable future must be
default comprised of a mix of technologies. The revision to the Heat Strategy of March 2013 also gave more pr
defaultevalence to gas in that energy mix.  However, the RHI and other policies will also drive a future with more renewable products on the grid, some of which, like heat pumps, use electricity. We have conducted research into some of the likely future combinati
defaultons of heating technologies and centralised energy production; the graph overleaf represents our high-level findings. 
default 
defaultAs the graphic above shows, the best-case scenario in terms of CO2 emissions for the future UK energy mix would be to combine highly-efficient 
defaultheat pumps with renewable electricity
default generation. 
defaultEven i
defaultf heat pumps are
default used in combination with electricity
default gen
defaulterated from a mixed source
default, as they are today
default, they remain a far better option than 
defaultother forms of heating- which produce
default more carbon emissions
default and consume more raw energy
default. It makes sense, therefore, to continue to support the deployme
defaultnt of heat pumps and 
defaultencourage the reform of the UK’s energy markets towards a broader energy mix.
default&#xa0;default7.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhy is community heating/CHP not more common in the UK?default&#xa0;defaultWe believe that an opportunity has 
defaultto date
default been missed by the Government to drive community heating for multiple occupancy dwellings, and in particular high rise buildings, in the UK. This is because there has been done little work in the UK to date to define “community energy” as it relates to th
defaulte UK heating sector, and examine innovative new solutions to the community energy problem using technologies other than CHP. We were therefore are pleased 
defaultthat the Government recently consulted on the development of a Community Energy Strategy, to which we
default have offered evidence.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere has been significant evidence 
defaultp
defaultut forward to suggest that community heating should be a priority for the UK Government going forward, as the 2013 Heat Strategy makes clear (below). Government models suggest that up to 20% of 
defaultUK domestic heat demand could be met by community heating schemes by 2030, with such schemes offering energy efficiency benefits over traditional individual heating systems:
defaultIn particular, the 2009 Poyry report suggested that heat networks could offer b
defaultenefits to urban communities, where heat demand was concentrated. Deployment to this kind of property could halve carbon emissions compared with using existing technologies.
default We believe that recognising 
defaultground and 
defaultair source heat pumps as a technology whic
defaulth could deliver this kind of community heating scheme efficiently and cost-effectively, would help drive the deployment of this kind of collective heating system.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur own research highlights the opportunity for policymakers of recognising heat pump system
defaults for deployment as community heating in low and high rise flats in the UK, to replace existing heating technologies.  
defaultFor the purposes of our research, we defined “low rise” as having 6 storeys or less and “high rise” as having more than 6 storeys. 
defaultTo ide
defaultntify the potentia
defaultl numbers of dwellings which could be eligible for a community heating system using heat pump technology, we sourced numbers from:
defaultResearch focused on those properties which used Electric and Mains Gas Heating, as these are the key heating technologies used in this type of housing at present. There are a
defaultdditional properties which use communal heating which could be replaced with a heat 
defaultpump (although this is relatively difficult); there are around 0.222 million properties which currently use communal heating.
defaultOur analysis is below: 
defaultOur headline 
defaultfindings are:
defaultThis represents 13.4 GW of 
defaultpotential heat met through community 
defaultheating
default 
defaultIf existing communal heating systems were replaced with a heat pump system, the potential number of UK properties which could be impacted is 3,574,000. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, there are barriers to the deployment of such systems. There are inadvertent obstacles created by policymakers through over-looking solutions provided by technologies such as 
defaultheat pumps
default.  There are also significant practical problems such as a lack
default of information and technical knowledge available and a lack of financing for systems which currently have a high capital cost of installation relative to mass-manufactured traditional heating alternatives.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is also possible to combine heat pump install
defaultations with CHP. 
defaultAll CHP installations need secondary heat sources
default, and a 
defaultmodel which 
defaultuses
default both 
defaultheat pumps and CHP
default could provide further carbon savings
default. 
defaultThis is because the heat pump can use the electricity generated by CHP and 
defaultupgrade it
default at high efficienc
defaulty levels to make heat.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Low Carbon Pioneer Cities programme is an example of the kind of work needed to stimulate the growth of low carbon heat networks; we look forward to seeing the £3m outlined in the Heat Strategy for the Heat Networks Delivery U
defaultnit and the additional £6m for local authority procurement and technical reporting come into effect. 
default&#xa0;
default8.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat are the lock-in, costs and GHG savings from the promotion of different forms of domestic heating solution?default&#xa0;
defaultThe se
defaultlection of a heating system is
default a rare occasion for a consumer with conventional boilers lasting around ten years before replacement is required. Consumers typically rely on the advice provided by heating installers who are unlikely to recommend a heating solution that they cannot insta
defaultll. Thus, active promotion of alternatives is essential to inform/shape the choice of heating replacement. Failure to do so means lock in of costs and emissions for at least 10 years.
default&#xa0;
defaultFor an individual system in a typical on-gas three bedroom semi-detache
defaultd property, the impact of selecting a gas boiler over an Air Source Heat Pump could be
default around £100
default 
defaultin higher bills annually 
defaultand just under 1 tonne of CO2 
defaulteach year
default.
default 1.5 million boilers are installed every year in the UK meaning that in 2013 alone, UK consu
defaultmers are theoretically missing out on £150 million of annual energy bill savings. These missed savings (both financial and GHG) are likely to be locked in at least until 2023.
default&#xa0;
defaultSupporting evide
defaultnce for the assumptions above are set out in the following figu
defaultres:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultASHPdefaultGas BoilerdefaultEfficiency (Space Heating)default3
default90%
defaultEfficiency (Hot Water)default2.5
default80%
defaultTech. life in yearsdefault20
default10
defaultFuel PricesdefaultElectricity
default(15.22 pence/kWh)*
defaultNatural Gas 
default(4.7 pence/kWh)*
defaultOperating Cost (£/annum)default£632
default£744
defaultEmission Factors default(kgCO2/kWh)default0.5179*
default0.1848*
defaultCO2 Emissions (tCO2/annum)default2.15
default2.92
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default9.default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultShould the government take any further any specific actions in relation to cooling?default&#xa0;
defaultThe priority for policymakers should be on reducing heat demand, rather than focusing on cooling. 
defaultIt is of course right to be concerned with making cooling technologies as efficient and low carbon as possible, but with the current trajectory for low carbon and energy efficient heating being a key concern, it is important that policy and delivery remain
defaults focused on these technologies in order to meet legally binding emissions reduction and renewables targets.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is sensible, however, to ensure that cooling and ventilation issues remain part of the debate about the heating market as it develops over the 
defaultcoming years. It is sensible, for instance, that policy makers consider ventilation technologies as part of an energy efficiency strategy which will drive the installation of insulation, draught proofing and so on into retrofit properties. It is important 
defaultto ensure that properties are thermally efficiency and do not over-heat when temperatures are high, as they have been in 
defaultsummer
default 2013. Ventilation may well be part of such solutions.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe air conditioning market is being pushed hard to increase efficiency t
defaulthrough the European Directive on Energy Using Products
default 
defaultThis 
defaultD
defaultirective will encourage increased energy efficiency through innovation and development
default of technologies
default. Products which recover heat from server rooms, move heat build-up around buildings and reco
defaultver heat from hot water are already in existence.
default 
defaultSuch technologies
default are 
defaultalso 
defaultwell developed in harvesting heat from the ground and air
default,
default 
defaultknown respectively as “ground source” and “air source”
default&#xa0;
defaultThe government should be wary of 
defaulttechnologies which simply deliv
defaulter 
default‘
defaultactive cooling
default’
default such as ground to water heat 
defaultpumps, which
default are pitched as increasing the efficiency of the heating element over the course of seasons.
default A better way of increasing the heating efficiency over seasons is to use passive cooling (cool water s
defaulttraight from the ground)
default. I
defaultn
default order to take advantage of the cooling properties of water pumped straight from the ground, heat emmitters would need to be sized bigger. However the process uses very little electrical energy (just the pump). 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe RHI currently supports heating-only technologies, and we support this 
defaultas a policy principle because it is
default this market that needs stimulus for growth
default. Much more independent analysis would need to be performed on heating and cooling systems before it wou
defaultld be wise to consider it as a genuine policy solution. 
default&#xa0;
default10.default&#xa0; 
defaultWhy does the RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully? default&#xa0;defaultThe commercial RHI has been under-deployed to date, and has favoured the deployment of biomass technologies, with over 90% of installa
defaulttions on the scheme so far being solid biomass burners:
default&#xa0;
defaultThe government has already recognised and responded to this issue, however, by announcing a tariff review of the non-domestic scheme and the proposed tariff levels for several new technologies (including air to water heat pumps). These new tariff levels ha
defaultve taken into consideration updated modelling assumptions, such as the capital cost of installation, and has recalibrated tariffs at the appropriate level to drive the 12% rate of return on their investment that should motivate a consumer to install a new 
defaulttechnology. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMoreover, there has been a delay to the implementation of the domestic RHI scheme. The final proposals for this scheme were made in September 2012, and the announcement of the final Government proposals was made this summer 2013. This long aw
defaultaited announcement contained the information industry needed to start gearing up supply chains, talking to consumers, and booking more installations, as it included vital information such as tariff levels, eligibility requirements, and technological detail
defaults such as metering proposals. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe reason for low deployment of the RHI so far has therefore been twofold, firstly the delay to announcing and implementing both domestic and non-domestic schemes impacted upon industry confidence, and dis
default-
defaultincentivised manu
defaultfacturers and installers to increase their activity on the basis that the subsidy was uncertain. In addition the tariff levels which were in place were too low to generate the required rate of return for heat pump technologies, or had been proposed but not
default yet finalised or implemented (as is the case with the commercial air to water tariff).
default&#xa0;
defaultTherefore it is reasonable to expect that 
defaultif 
defaultthe Government announces the finalised commercial RHI tariffs on time when parliament returns in the autumn of 2013, at the levels proposed (which should generate a 12% RoR), 
defaultand implements both commercial 
defaultand domestic schemes on time in Spring 2014, the R
defaultHI will promote heat pumps and all of the technologies it supports successfully. 
default&#xa0;
default11.default&#xa0; 
defaultHow successful will the RHI be when rolled out to households?default&#xa0;
defaultThe most recent Impact Assessment of the Renewable Heat Incentive says that “the RHI is a subsidy scheme opera
defaultting under a fixed budget with the objective of incentivising the deployment of renewable heat such that by 2020 12% of the UK’s heat demand comes from renewable sources”. 
defaultThe benefits are expected to be profound, with the larger domestic scheme estimated 
defaultto deliver around £1,077m in benefits in deployment.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe scheme also targets specific segments of the UK heating market, specifically the off-gas grid properties, and has been calculated on the same model as the existing heating market, where consumers wo
defaultuld be looking to retrofit an old boiler (and are therefore locked in to their heating system for 15 years or more). 
defaultDECC have said that the potential market size is “highly uncertain; both in terms of what may be technically possible and actually feasible
default”
default, because the scheme will be demand led. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFurthermore, there is a budget management mechanism in place which should keep the scheme to its projected levels; no technology should be able to overrun its budgeted expenditure, and the scheme overall will be 
defaultrestricted to a prescribed budget. The budget management mechanism looks at both overall scheme deployment, and individual technology deployment, when deciding whether tariffs should be reduced. Expenditure (as of 1
defaultst
default Quarter of 2013) for the RHI (non-domestic only) is shown below:
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is therefore reason to believe that when the domestic RHI is implemented in the spring of 2014, along with the revisions to the non-domestic tariffs, the scheme will build to a poi
defaultnt of success commensurate 
defaultwith the projects made by DECC. In terms of installation this means around 745,000 domestic renewable heat installations in the UK will be supported by the RHI by 2020/21;
default the Government anticipates that 343,000 ASHP will be sup
defaultported by the domestic RHI. 
default&#xa0;default12.default&#xa0; 
defaultThermal storage is a potential useful method of balancing electricity/energy demand both diurnally and annually. What is government policy doing to promote thermal storage, adefaultnd should it do more/different?default&#xa0;defaultThermal storage technologies are currently in their infancy, and are not yet appropriate both in terms of cost-effectiveness and scale, for individual properties. There is also a further question about the usefulness of thermal storage in a future scenario
default where there would be many more inverter-driven heat pumps on the grid; the nature of this technology is that thermal storage may be an unnecessary additional expense for balancing electricity demand. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThat said, as part of an organised reworking, at syst
defaultem level, of the grid, then thermal storage could be useful as part of the large scale demand side response efforts which should be being led by the district network operators and others in the electricity markets. There are also innovative 
defaultnew technology 
defaultsolutions which are being enabled through the development of storage technologies, for example, the combination of Solar PV and Electrical Storage could overcome the gap between the hours of peak generation and peak demand experienced in solar technologies
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe most sensible approach for the government at this stage would be to encourage the development of cost-effective storage technologies, and look into innovative technology combinations. Where thermal storage could be utilised with immediate effect is in 
defaultthe future design of the electricity markets, where it offers a large-scale solution (or part solution) to the needs of demand side response and grid balancing. It is impractical to suggest, for instance, a subsidy for this technology for small-scale balan
defaultcing at householder level at this stage of its development. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default Ofgem RHI Quarterly Statics, Jan-March 2013
default Green Deal and ECO Monthly Statistics, DECC
default, June 2013
default 
defaultEcuity LLP, 2011.
default Mitsubishi Electric, options for the UK’s future energy mix. 
default Government Heat Strategy, DECC, March 2013
default&#xa0;
default RHI Update, Ofgem, June 2013
default April 2013 RHI Degression Statement, DECC
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/211978/Domestic_RHI_Impact_Assessment.pdf
default