&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence fromdefault Hampshire County Councildefault (TIC 070)defaultHampshire is a large county
default – 3,700 square kilometres with a population of 1.3 million. It is 85% rural, yet 77% of the population live in
default the
default 
defaulturban
default areas.
default 
defaultCar ownership and journey to work length are above the national average reducing opportunities for public transport.  
default&#xa0;
defaultAgainst
default this background, Hampshire County Council has 
defaultdeveloped
default a range of transport initiatives, training and community engagement 
defaultprogrammes
default and 
defaulthas 
defaultparticipated in national projects
default. The opportunity to respond to the Committee is welcomed.
default&#xa0;
defaultFor simplicity, we 
defaulthave provided responses 
defaultagainst
default the questions posed by the Committee. We will be happy to clarify or expand any answer if required.
default&#xa0;
default1.1
default 
defaultIn our countywide review of passenger transport over the period 2006-2009 we 
defaultcombined a wide range of
default existing data including c
defaultensus information as to age, car ownership and income, DfT Accession software showing acce
defaultss by public transport
default and on foot 
default to key amenities, on-bus surveys of passenger travel patterns, journey purpose, age and ethnicity and modal split information. 
default&#xa0;
default1.2
default 
defaultNonetheless, the people who understand local needs best are the elected Members and the 
defaultlocal community
default, so Hampshire has established a network of parish transport representatives and holds annua
defaultl passenger transport forums  for
default each district. These have a membership of 1,900 representing a wide range of community groups and organisations. Th
defaulte
default forums
default are an essential part of 
defaultgaining information about local issues
default and
default 
defaultdeveloping
default and testing
default transport options
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.1 As part of our work for the LGA Transport Innovation Project, we developed a   process of co-design, working closely with the local community, other service providers
default,
default 
defaultex
defaultternal
default agencies and other County Council departments. We contributed to the County Council’s Older Person’s Well-being Strategy and worked closely with local members of the UK Young Persons’ Parliament. One outcome has been the widely publicised Transport 
defaultSelf-help Kit which enables local groups or communities 
defaultto
default 
defaultundertake
default 
defaulta detailed audit of existing transport provision and unmet local demand
default and see what solutions they could develop
default. 
defaulthttp://www3.hants.gov.uk/passengertransport/transport-self-help-kit.htm
default2.2 
defaultThe 
defaultmajor 
defaultBus Subsidy Review
default in 2011
default, which built on the earlier review work,
default involved detai
defaultled consultation through a wide range of channels and a 
defaultcomprehensive Equalities Impact Assessment. On bus passenger surveys ask
defaulted
default passengers to volunteer anonymous personal data and home post code which 
defaultwas
default be matched to Mosaic data 
defaultto help
default 
defaultmeasure
default how se
defaultrvice delivery represent
defaulted
default the community we serve.  
default&#xa0;default3.1 Isolation can be due to 
defaultgeography, mobility, lack of awareness, cultural barriers
default changed personal circumstances, such as the loss of a partner who drove,
default or financial concerns. Community engagement through parish transport representatives and transport forums seeks to overcome a
defaultwareness and cultural barriers whilst information provision at bus stops and stations, through electronic media and 
defaultvia 
defaultprinted material seeks to ensure that services are well promoted.
default3.2 Hampshire County Council has been successful in achieving the re-o
defaultpening of Chandler’s Ford railway station, and as a statutory consultee maintaining and improving services here and 
defaultat 
defaultother, often
default rural
default,
default stations. The County Council actively supports two local Community Rail Partnerships which help develop the Chandler’
defaults Ford line and remove
defaultd
default the closure risk of the Lymington branch.
default Community involvement is 
defaultcentral
default to success.
default3.3 
defaultBus users are widely represented among older and disadvantaged groups and the County Council has been successful in projects such as the A3 
defaultStar corridor and the Eclipse Bus Rapid Transit project between Fareham and Gosport
default. These have helped
default boost bus use to a twenty year high across Hampshire as well as promoting economic activity in deprived areas.
default 
defaulthttp://www3.hants.gov.uk/tfsh/eclipse.htm
default3.4 Conventional buses are mass transit and work best on highly populated corridors. A simpler strategic network of frequent services supported by demand responsive or community transport services s
defaulteems the most sustainable. This enables investment in modern easy access vehicles and allows rising fuel and wage costs to be recovered from passenger fares.
default3.5 Hampshire introduced the pioneering Cango flexible bus model in 2001. This combines fixed poin
defaultt, turn up and go travel, with bookable flexible routeing to provide a scheduled public bus which can meet the travel needs of dispersed communities.
default4.1 Hampshire has an active and well-developed community transport sector.  It follows a tool-box approach rather than a single solution and the County Council 
defaultunderpins a partnership with third
default sector
default organisatio
defaultns
default, volunteers and district and parish councils. The County Council contributes
default significant
default funding, 
defaultoffer
defaults start-up advice
default and grants
default, supports volunteer recruitment and provides a range of best 
defaultpractice sh
defaultaring sessions, road shows, nationally recognised 
defaulttraining programmes
default such as MiDAS
default and professional support and advice
default. 
default4.2 
defaultThis 
defaultstrength of the community transport sector in Hampshire 
defaultis in part due to the partnership approach which the authority has de
defaultveloped since the early 1980s. The sector is diverse with a wide range of organisations providing transport in the county, this includes: 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4.3 
defaultCommunity transport 
defaultis not a low-cost or no-cost option.
default Community-led organisations 
defaultdepend on loca
defaultl willingness and the availability of volunteers. This can make equality of provision 
defaultbetween 
defaultareas difficult to achieve. Many individuals and organisations value their independence. The County Council has found that the toolbox approach, with a range of s
defaultolutions, training and support and 
defaultthe 
defaultuse of commercial services such as Taxishares
default,
default where appropriate
default,
default can prove effective at meeting travel needs.
default5.1 
defaultOpportunities to extend rail provision are limited and a c
defaultonventional bus
default service
default is only cost-effective where passenger numbers warrant it. Those living close to urban bus networks in Hampshire are enjoying some of the best frequencies and 
defaultmost 
defaultmodern vehicles that have ever been provided
default, helped by County Council investment in Qualit
defaulty Bus Partnerships
default. 
defaultThose who
default live in a rural area
default on a busy inter-urban 
defaultbus route
default 
defaultoften have
default services 
defaultthat 
defaultare 
defaultas good as those of
default fifty years ago, apart from evenings and Sundays where higher
default car ownership has taken custom.  I
defaultn other areas new solutions 
defaultare needed.
default5.2 Hampshire has shown that Cango and community bus services can provide scheduled services in a different way. 
defaultIn addition
default, Hampshire has developed Taxi-shares to offer a timetabled service at local bus fares. They do require users to pre-boo
defaultk but this means that the service only runs when required 
defaultso 
defaultthat costs 
defaultare
default contained and a service 
defaultretained
default whe
defaultre
default a conventional bus would be unaffordable.
default 
defaulthttp://www3.hants.gov.uk/passengertransport/communitytransport/taxishares.htm
default6.1 In Hampshire, over 70% of bus services are provided commercially, that is funded by passenger fares
default. The County Council supports these services through Quality bus Partnerships, Better Bus Area and Local Sustainable Transport Fund projects, bus stop and bus station infrastructure investment and information provision. 
default6.2 Bus operating costs such as fue
defaultl and wages have been rising faster than general inflation meaning that services can become uneconomic and any replacement might look for subsidy funding from the local authority. Bus operators claim that concessionary fares reimbursement
default does not meet los
defaultt fares income, whilst BSOG has been reduced.
default Both have a poten
defaulttial to increase pressure on a finite
default bus subsidy budget.
default6.3 Concessionary fares reimbursement has placed a burden on Travel Concession Authorities, which are often Local Transport Authorities
default,
default a
defaults central g
defaultovernment funding is based on a formula according to population whilst cost are incurred according to use resulting in a funding shortfall.
default The eligible passholder population is projected to rise and central government funding to fall.
default6.4 Av
defaultailability of free concessionary travel means that chargeable services such as Dial-a-Ride are expected to accept passes or offer a discount – in Hampshire, the County Council subsidises half fare travel on Dial-a-Ride for concessionary pass holders. Simil
defaultarly, residents sometimes press for a bus service to be provided so that they can use their free passes even though there is a rail alternative offering reasonable, but not free, fares. 
defaultBoth are cost pressures.
default6.5 As facilities such as health, Post Office
defaults or banking centralise to save costs, there is an expectation that public transport will be available
default. This can involve
default travel to 
defaultlocat
defaultions away from the previous public transport 
defaultnetwork, longer journeys than are a
defaultttractive to bus users or 
defaultappointment
default ti
defaultmes that are earlier than the existing timetable can accommodate. All these can be additional costs on a finite bus subsidy budget, and although vital journeys for the users, 
defaultlow and fragmented 
defaultdemand mean
defaults
default that continuing subsidy would b
defaulte required
default.
default6.5 Fo
defaultr community transport, an ageing population points to a continuing demand, but family or work commitments reduce 
defaultthe 
defaultavaila
defaultbility of volunteers 
defaultwhile
default funding 
defaultpressures on upper-tier and district councils put
default budgets at risk. A variety of approaches as demo
defaultnstrated by Hampshire is essential
default but costs will remain
default.
default6.6 
defaultAge UK 
defaultin their 
defaultreport on Later Life in Rural England
default of
default July 2013
default recognise that lower rural population density and greater distances will increase journey cost per person and seek recognition of this through a ‘rural premium’ and ‘rural-proofing to take into account policy impacts. Hampshire County Council seeks to add
defaultress this through use of voluntary car schemes and scheduled Taxishare services.
default6.7 The benefits to the individual, to the wider community and the savings on health and social care budgets which come from good personal mobility through effective public an
defaultd community transport can be difficult to quantify and 
defaultany financial benefit
defaults would appear under a different budget heading to that where the cost falls.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultHampshire County
default Council experience over thirty years is that good public transport solutions are possible by working in partnership with all elements of the local community. Community engagement is essential to gain support and ensure that provision evolves as needs chan
defaultge. A variety of solutions, or to
defaultolbox approach, is needed to 
defaultaddress the needs of different individuals and varying situations. 
defaultCommunity engagement is demanding of time
default;
default local initiatives require help and advice 
defaultbut produce
default some excellent results. Volunt
defaulteers
default and the local community have a vital 
defaultrole to play but
default si
defaultgnificant on-going funding remains a requirement.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default