&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Anaerobic Digestion and Biogas Association (HOT47)default&#xa0;defaultThe Anaerobic Digestion and Biogas Association (ADBA) is the trade association that represents the range of interests and matters related to the anaerobic digestion of organic materials (“AD”) across the 
defaultUK
default. The organisation has over 
default350
default members from acros
defaults the AD industry, including farmers, local authorities, waste management companies, supermarkets, food processors, plant operators, energy and water companies, equipment manufacturers and suppliers, consultants, financiers and supporting service companies
default. 
default&#xa0;default1 defaultWhat is anaerobic digestion?default1.1 Biogas generated from the anaerobic digestion (AD) process can make a significant contribution to delivering affordable low-carbon heat, in both the domestic and non-domestic sectors.
default1.2 AD
default defaultis fuelled most commonly 
defaultby household food and garden waste, farm slurry, waste from food processing plants and supermarkets, and crop residues. These feedstocks react with micro-organisms to produce a biogas, which is approximately 60% methane and 40% carbon dioxide, and digestat
defaulte, which can be applied to farmland to reduce the need for damaging artificial fertilisers.
default1.3 The AD process delivers a number of important strategic economic and environmental benefits for the UK. The sector could produce 40TWh of energy (equivalent to 
defaultover 10% of domestic gas demand) of biogas based on the available feedstock in the UK, providing 35,000 jobs as well as supporting the development of a supply chain with very significant export potential.
default1.4 As well as the renewable energy generated, trea
defaultting organic waste through AD realises other significant environmental benefits, allowing critical nutrients in these wastes, such as phosphorus, to be returned to land to support food production. Large greenhouse gas emissions savings will also be achieve
defaultd through treating organic waste such as food waste through AD, rather than other options such as landfill or incineration. AD also helps to support farming operations, for example purpose grown crops (PGCs) for AD are grown as break crops which complement
default agricultural rotations and improve soil quality
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2 Role of AD in heat generationdefault2.1 Biogas can be combusted in a CHP engine to generate heat and power or it can be upgraded to a renewable natural gas equivalent (biomethane) and injected directly into 
defaultthe gas grid. 
defaultThe first commercial-scale biomethane to grid project in the UK started injecting renewable gas in late 2012. 
default2.2 
defaultAD 
defaulttechnology 
defaulthas helped businesses in a range of sectors 
defaultreduc
defaulte
default their energy bills, as well as enhancing their sustainability 
defaultcredentials. Farmers, food and drink processers and water companies are particular leaders in the field, 
defaultas they can recycle organic wastes to generate the power and heat their businesses need
default.
default 
defaultAs well as using the biogas to meet their on-site energy 
defaultneeds, operators can also supply heat to nearby buildings or businesses.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default3 Barriers to heat usedefaultIssues with the Renewable Heat Incentivedefault3.1 There are few technological barriers to the greater use of renewable heat from the AD process – the viability of
default the technology has already been proven in the UK and across Europe. What is holding back the industry is the uncertainties around certain aspects of support under the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) and the resultant problems this creates in terms of the a
defaultbility to finance infrastructure developments.
default3.2 At present the RHI only supports biogas projects with a thermal capacity up to 200kW thermal capacity. This means that the vast majority of biogas CHP projects are effectively forced to waste any heat they
default generate, as the cost of developing the heat infrastructure is prohibitive without RHI support. DECC have committed to addressing this issue and allowing support for biogas combustion levels at all levels, but delays to this 
defaulthave not helped
default investment in 
defaultbiogas CHP projects. We have submitted evidence to DECC on this point which we would be happy to share with the Committee if it would be helpful. 
default3.3 Similarly, a lack of a preliminary accreditation mechanism under the RHI is also 
defaultholding back
default the develop
defaultment of the biogas heat and biomethane injection market. DECC introduced a degression system from June 2013, which will see tariffs automatically reduced if budget spend under the scheme reaches pre-determined levels. 
defaultUnlike the electricity Feed in Tariff
default,
default they have not introduced a preliminary accreditation model which would allow developers to 
default‘
defaultlock in
default’
default a tariff rate once they have reached a certain stage in their project. 
defaultThis provides a significant financial risk to project developers, especially for la
defaultrger plants which typically take at least a year to build. 
defaultAccess to food wastedefault3.4 
defaultT
defaulthe development of the whole AD sector is dependent on being able to access food waste from businesses and local authorities
default. O
defaultf 
defaultthe total 
defaultpotential
default energy the industry could generate, over 60% comes from these sources
default. While the first priority when dealing with food waste should of course be to reduce the quantity generated, 
defaultfor example by 
defaultredistributing uneaten food whenever possible, there will alw
defaultays be a large portion of unavoidable food waste (
defaulte.g.
default vegetable peelings, teabags) that must be dealt with. 
default3.5 Government confirmed in their 2011 
defaultWaste Review
default  that AD offer
defaults
default the “greatest environmental benefit” of any food waste treatment
default 
default– 
defaultbut 
defaultat present only 7% of food waste in the UK is treated through AD, while 35% is still landfilled.
default3.6 One of the key ways in which
default government can do this is through the introduction of separate food waste collections, which allow AD operators improved access to a less contaminated feedstock, while also improving the recycling rate for other dry recyclates.
default3.7 A ban on sending biodeg
defaultradable waste to landfill would also deliver similar benefits for the AD industry, as well as wider environmental and economic benefits. A recent 
defaultGreen Alliance report
default  
defaultdemonstrated that UK 
defaultorganisations could save £508m in avoided landfil
defaultl costs and £693m could be generated in the value recovered from sending our food waste to anaerobic digestion. 
default&#xa0;
default3.8 Scotland and Wales are far ahead of England in terms of supporting moves towards these more sustainable waste management practices. Under 
defaulttheir 
defaultZero Waste Plan
default, the
default Scottish Government has provided the 
defaultlegislative framework to support rolling out food waste collections across all local authorities and businesses by 2015 and for banning 
defaultorganic waste to landfill by 2020.
default3.9 Wales has also made important progress in delivering more effective waste managem
defaultent through statutory waste recovery targets. Welsh local authorities are currently required to recover (this includes AD) 52% of municipal waste, rising to 70% by 2024, and 
defaultwhere councils recycle source-segregated food waste using AD, it will fund up to 2
default5% of the council’s food waste treatment costs under 15 year guaranteed contracts. This has helped to facilitate a situation today whereby 88% of Welsh households have separate food waste collections, in comparison to just 13% of households in England. 
default&#xa0;
defaultCdefaultonsultation Questionsdefault1. There are sustainability guidelines for biomass, do these go far enough?defaultADBA believes that 
defaultproposals for 
defaultsustainability criteria for biomass are generally fair – with the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI) stipulating that AD plants t
defaultreating non-waste feedstocks must achieve a 60% reduction in GHG emissions.
default 
defaultThe criteria also require generators of renewable heat to meet land use criteria, 
defaultconsisting of general restrictions on the use of biomass sourced from land with high biodiversity or high carbon stock value such as primary forest, peatland or wetland. 
defaultHowever, the 
defaultgreenhouse gas 
defaultcomparator for biomethane risks causing market distortion
defaults. Biomethane projects will be required to make 60% savings on the EU fossil heat average. Compared to the EU energy mix in general this is a very stringent requirement
default.
default Sustainability 
defaultcriteria for the Renewables Obligation are based on the carbon intensit
defaulty of electricity, which is much higher, so effectively a less stringent requirement. In the case of AD, projects have a choice of either generating electricity (and heat) or biomethane from their biogas, so this difference could risk the development of bio
defaultmethane injection projects in the UK. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn terms of the longer term development of European bioenergy sustainability criteria, leaked 
defaultEuropean Commission proposals
default 
defaultsuggest that future policy could exacerbate this problem. 
defaultThe proposed criteria are very similar to those existing criteria under the RO and RHI, calling for 60% GHG savings over fossil fuel comparators, 
defaultand the protection of peatland, land with high bio
defaultdiversity value and land with high carbon stock. Unlike the RHI however, the suggested comparator for biomethane injection is EU average emissions from natural gas, 
defaultwhich has an even lower carbon footprint than the 
defaultEU fossil heat average. This would lead t
defaulto overly stringent criteria as natural gas is a relatively clean fuel in the fossil mix. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis also doesn’t take into account that biomethane to grid is one of the most efficient forms of bioenergy conversion, (
defaulti.e.
default the energy which can be generated per 
defaultunit of land). Empirical data from the German Energy Agency has compared biomethane to other biofuels in terms of km driven per hectare of fuel production, which showed that biomethane was almost three times as land use efficient as bioethanol, biodiesel a
defaultnd rapeseed oil.
default In 2010 the Carbon Trust suggested that generating biomethane is the most effective option for biogas from a carbon perspective, assuming further decarbonisation of the electricity mix, though this does depend on the particular circumstanc
defaultes of a project. 
defaultWe agree with the principle of land use criteria, but also believe that as well as seeking to minimise the negative environmental impacts of biomass, the criteria should take into account the wider benefits that each form of biomass can d
defaulteliver through a comparable set of criteria.
default L
defaultand is needed to grow food, fuel and fibre, and all should be considered at national and international level. In the long term, sustainability criteria for financial incentives should consider land use in this 
defaultway, and we believe that greater research and development funding is required into mechanisms for setting land use policy. 
defaultFor now, sustainability criteria should go as far as possible to encourage energy production which integrates with good farming prac
defaulttice and other positive externalities, alongside efficient generation. For example, purpose grown crops (PGC) for AD typically integrate well into agricultural rotations, acting as a break or cover crop to help improve soil quality and yields, reduce chemi
defaultcal inputs to control persistent weeds and pests, and bring marginal farmland into use. The land used to grow PGC is not tied up for the whole year (or even whole decades), and during the rest of the time is available to grow crops for food. Unlike other f
defaultorms of bioenergy, bioenergy generated through AD recycles the nutrients contained in the feedstock in the form of digestate, which can then be returned to the soil to improve soil quality, displace artificial fertilisers and support farming and food produ
defaultction. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAny future criteria around indirect land use change (ILUC) must take into account these wider sustainability benefits that the growth of purpose grown crops for AD 
defaultcan 
defaultrealise. 
default&#xa0;
default3. What are the relative merits of using gas to directly provide space heating compared to centralised electricity production plus domestic heat pumps? defaultAs set out in our introduction, biogas is a flexible renewable fuel which can suit a variety of energy 
defaultrequirements. As a constantly generated source of energy, biogas can be used on-site to meet existing power requirements, or exported for use to nearby businesses or organisations.
defaultBiogas can also be upgraded to biomethane and then injected into the gas gr
defaultid, playing a key role in helping to decarbonise the gas grid. Upgrading biogas to biomethane is around 98% energy efficient, and as biogas is a limited resource, this is an 
defaultimportant part
default of the market that must be encouraged. 
default&#xa0;default4. Why is community heatindefaultg/CHP not more common in the UK?default&#xa0;defaultFor biogas, a lack of support under the RHI for projects with a thermal capacity over 200kW 
defaulthas 
defaultclearly hamper
defaulted
default the financial viability of many projects. Almost all biogas projects in the UK use CHP engines, but without R
defaultHI support the vast majority are not able to develop the infrastructure to make use of the 
defaultexcess 
defaultheat generated and it is wasted. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAssisting the conversion of existing biogas CHP plants is therefore a simple way of enabling the delivery of a significant 
defaultquantity of renewable heat, particularly in the commercial sector.
default There is currently over 90MW of installed electrical capacity from the UK’s biogas CHP plants which have an electrical capacity over 200kW (outside the water sector), and given that the the
defaultrmal capacity of a CHP installation will typically be higher than its electrical capacity, there is clearly great scope for delivering renewable heat as a result of this simple change to the RHI outlined above.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default