&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by E3G (CCS33)default1. Summarydefault1.1
default              
defaultThe current UK approach to CCS is too narrowly focussed on electricity 
defaultgeneration and the procurement of individual projects. This must be urgently supplemented by a view on what ultimate deployment of CCS could look like in a decarbonised economy, and the necessary practical actions that are required to enable this to be ach
defaultieved.
default1.2
default              
defaultThe Office of CCS within DECC is tied down in ‘delivery’ mode. While recognising that it is seeking to do a difficult task with 
defaultreduced
default funding, it is failing to catalyse the parallel efforts in enabling infrastructure and industrial CCS require
defaultd to enable wider deployment and cost reduction. The OCCS is also responsible for fossil fuel 
defaultstrategy
default, but CCS is insufficiently integrated into current policies – particularly the gas strategy and the prospects for continued use of coal. 
default1.3
default              
defaultUK policy o
defaultn CCS appears to reflect a fear of being seen to be ‘picking winners’
default: the first UK competition picked a technology option and suffered for it. We would therefore agree that maintaining openness to different capture technologies should be continued. Howeve
defaultr it is imperative that a more proactive approach be taken to ‘pick geologies’ (for large-scale storage) and ‘pick geographies’ (for infrastructure investment).
default This will provide the largest benefits to the UK via cost reduction, the retention of industria
defaultl jobs and the development of exportable CCS engineering and integration expertise.
default1.4
default              
defaultPrevious UK leadership on CCS in Europe and internationally has been diminished over recent years. The UK needs to ensure that it secures funding from the second round 
defaultof the NER300 mechanism, and should be taking a more proactive approach to EU policy discussions. The introduction of a CCS certificate system (or similar) could bring significant benefits for UK projects.
default2. About E3G and defaultour engagement in defaultCCSdefault2.1 
default              
defaultE3G is
default an independent, non-profit organisation operating in the public interest to accelerate the global transition to sustainable development. E3G builds cross-sectoral coalitions to achieve carefully defined outcomes, chosen for their capacity to leverage chan
defaultge. E3G works closely with like-minded partners in government, politics, civil society, science, the media, public interest foundations and elsewhere. Further information is available at 
defaultwww.e3g.org
default .
default2.2
default              
defaultE3G welcomes the
default ECC committee inquiry into CCS. E3G has been closely involved in UK, European and International efforts to accelerate action on CCS over the past decade, including the creation of the EU’s NER300 funding mechanism and the Near Zero Emission Coal (NZEC) pr
defaultoject between the UK, EU and China.
default E3G is represented on the Advisory Council of the European Technology Platform for Zero 
defaultEmission Fossil Fuel Power Plants (ZEP) and is a member of the International Environmental NGO network on CCS.
default2.3
default              
defaultE3G recognises th
defaultat it will be 
defaultdifficult for 
defaultthe international community to secure a global deal on climate unless key countries and constituencies 
defaultfeel
default that they can maintain energy security while reducing emissions. In our view, the deployment of CCS is therefore both a 
defaulttechnological necessity (as a stable climate will only be secured if we limit the 
defaultstock
default of CO2 emissions in the atmosphere) and a political intervention that can shape the space for other actions and agreements.
default2.4
default              
defaultIn this submission, we look at three are
defaultas that we believe require additional attention from UK policy makers: 
defaultWe will be pleased to provide additional evidence if requested.
default&#xa0;
default3. Context: why CCS? What should be prioritised?default3.1
default              
defaultThe premise behind CCS is simple but stated
default with insufficient frequency or clarity. A continued growth in CO2 emissions to the atmosphere will result in an unstable climate and ocean acidification. This is related to the stock of CO2 in the atmosphere, not the rate of emissions in any particular ye
defaultar. 
default3.2
default              
defaultTo adequately address this challenge, emissions of CO2 must not just be slowed – they must ultimately be stopped. Indeed, the forthcoming 5
defaultth
default Assessment Report of the IPCC is expected to highlight that 
defaultnegative emissions will be required to operat
defaulte globally at large scale before 2050
default 
defaultin addition to CCS on power plant and industry,
default 
defaultin order t
defaulto limit global climate warming to less than 2°C. Thus, CO2 needs to be removed from earth’s biosphere into 
defaultpermanent sequestration
default. 
default3.3
default              
defaultThe technological challenge facing humanity is therefore to phase out the use of unabated fossil fuels, or, where this is not possible, to deploy CCS. 
default3.4
default              
defaultCCS will be indispensable to mitigate emissions from processes where CO2 emissions are an integral p
defaultart of production (steel, cement, chemicals etc) and to enable negative emissions (via direct air capture or in combination with biomass) as a means of offsetting other sources of emissions that cannot be captured at source. 
default3.5
default              
defaultCCS for electricity genera
defaulttion is different, in that it provides 
defaultjust 
defaultone option among others for the production of low-carbon electricity. CCS 
defaultdoes however 
defaultoffer the 
defaultprospect of flexible generation capacity that can be dispatched in support of a high Renewables grid. CCS will be p
defaultarticularly valuable for locations with significant industrial production capacity, as it will be able to provide both low-carbon electricity and heat, and share the costs of CO2 transport and storage with other emitters. 
default3.6
default              
defaultIt should therefore be noted 
defaultthat the UK approach of seeking to enable cost-competitive deployment of CCS within the electricity generation sector seeks to address the CCS challenge from the opposite end of this set of problems. It posits that making CCS ‘available’ will then enable d
defaulteployment via carbon prices. It fails to take a view on what is likely to be desirable as an end-state deployment of CCS within a low-carbon economy, nor on what enabling actions will be required to enable this widespread deployment to occur. The absence o
defaultf a proactive approach on CO2 transport and storage infrastructures and the e
defaultxclusion of industrial CCS are symptomatic of this approach. The USA has shown far greater ability to develop CCS projects by specifically focussing on these practical aspects of 
defaultthe CCS challenge.
default3.
default7
default              
defaultIt should be noted here that the 
defaultvalue
default of CCS is not the same as the 
defaultcost
default of CCS per ton of CO2 captured or stored. The highest value for CCS in future will be for negative emissions that assist in climate stabilization. Next will be
default the value for job retention and maintained economic output for the economy from CCS on industrial production. The valuation of CCS on power generation should subsequently be based on the cost of CCS when measured against clean power produced, not by tons 
defaultof CO2. This would indicate that CCS on natural gas is preferable to CCS on coal or lignite, as it has half the CO2 volume.
default3.8
default              
defaultAcross Europe, the potential for CCS on gas has been regrettably overlooked in favour of coal and lignite, due to the centrality
default of emissions trading as the favoured policy instrument and the assumption that CCS should be deployed first on lignite, then coal due to higher carbon costs. On this logic, CCS would only be deployed on gas if the cost of carbon reaches over €100/ton, wit
defaulth CCS on industry a long-way down the line (due to higher costs per ton due to lower CO2 volumes). The UK 
defaultCommercialisation Programme has addressed this by
default valuing CCS for electricity generation on the basis of 
defaultelectricity 
defaultoutput rather than per ton of CO2
default, but has failed to apply this same logic to the industrial sector.
default3.
default9
default              
defaultThe 
defaultprioritisation
default of CCS on gas-fired electricity generation rather than coal is also desirable when considering global emissions limits. CCS on gas offers the prospect of a potential
defaultly near closed life-cycle loop from production of gas through processing and combustion and back to storage of CO2. A similar life-cycle for coal will at best be able to reduce emissions by around 70%. Gas production typically has a lower local environment
defaultal impact than coal production, as does its combustion. Natural gas has fewer impurities, aiding the carbon capture process, while the smaller volumes of CO2 produced per clean MW generated present half the requirement for CO2 transportation and storage. 
default3.
default10
default              
defaultThis is of particular relevance when considering the availability of CO2 storage. While there is a large theoretical volume of CO2 storage accessible, the current practical reality is that it is a scarce asset. Access to CO2 storage should therefore b
defaulte prioritized for the highest value applications, not taken up by low-value high-CO2 sources.
default3.11
default              
defaultIn the context of the impact of shale gas extraction on US energy prices, t
defaulthere is great strategic value in advancing the deployment of CCS on gas power gene
defaultration.
default A shift from coal to gas reduces emissions significantly, but only with the deployment of CCS would gas have a longer-term sustainable role in the UK or Europe.
default3.12
default              
defaultWith the Peterhead project one of the remaining two projects in the UK Commerciali
defaultsation Programme, the UK is well-placed to reap the rewards – but current policy 
defaultas set out in the gas strategy and in the proposals for Emissions Performance Standards 
defaultbizarrely seeks to remove new waves of gas plant from the need to consider the deployme
defaultnt or retrofit of CCS.
default 
default3.13
default              
defaultThe UK should instead be setting out a pathway for the retrofit and or deployment of CCS on gas-fired generation from the outset as a means of providing investors with a clearer business case out to 2030 and beyond. At present 
defaultthe position of exempting gas plants from the EPS out to 2045 is incoherent in the context of carbon budgets and the assumption that carbon prices will rise to restrict running hours and / or incentivise CCS.
default 
default3.14
default              
defaultThe
defaultre is a
default need for greater clarity of pu
defaultrpose in government policy to restate the necessary shift from unabated fossil fuels to the widespread deployment of CCS over the coming decades.
default Given that the Office of CCS is also responsible for policy on fossil fuels, more should have been expected on
default this over recent years. Instead, DECC has appeared to be seeking to extend the lifetime of old coal plant and encourage new unabated gas (in the face of continued pressure from HM Treasury). Prospects for CCS have been overlooked rather than positioned at
default the centre of HM Government strategy on fossil fuels.
default3.15
default              
defaultSimilarly, the application of CCS to industrial facilities was only weakly featured in the CCS Roadmap. BIS have recently commissioned analysis on costs, but no clear forward strategy has been ide
defaultntified. The OCCS, meanwhile, has declined to take a proactive role in supporting potential industrial CCS projects as it concentrates on the Commercialisation Programme for electricity generation projects. We are aware of at least one project that could b
defaulte taken forward rapidly but which seemingly cannot be supported by the UK government due to it not being linked to electricity generation.
default3.16
default              
defaultWhile the desire of DECC / OCCS to ensure successful ‘delivery’ after past failures is understandable, the curre
defaultnt narrow approach is setting back chances of securing the timely and widespread deployment of CCS in the UK. 
default&#xa0;default4. CCS availability, cost reduction and UK benefitsdefault4.1
default              
defaultA range of technologies for CO2 capture are already available, some of which have many 
defaultdecades of commercial application (see for example, the separation of CO2 in gas processing facilities or ammonia production). CO2 transport and storage have also been deployed at commercial scale, particularly when in combination with Enhanced Oil Recover
defaulty (CO2-EOR) in North America.
default4.2
default              
defaultContinued innovation and cost reduction of capture technologies is possible, and will be accelerated by the development of global markets for CCS. The UK will benefit from the development of such markets in a limited way v
defaultia the presence of manufacturing facilities for the major technology companies.
default4.3
default              
defaultMore importantly, the major initial cost reductions for CCS projects will come from inescapably ‘local’ issues regarding accessibility of CO2 storage and the provision of C
defaultO2 transport infrastructure. 
defaultT
defaulthe findings of the UK’s CCS Cost Reduction Taskforce point to the centrality of risk reduction and economies of scale as a means of reducing project cost and enabling commercial deployment.
default4.4
default              
defaultIt must be remembered that ‘CCS’
default is in fact a integrated set of technologies more akin to the infrastructure associated with oil and gas production, processing and distribution, and not a simple bolt-on pollution control instrument. CCS policy therefore needs to consider network solution
defaults for CCS, not simply point-to-point project investment models. We will return to this failing of UK policy making below.
default4.5
default              
defaultSome policy makers (including HM Treasury) have queried why the UK should invest in CCS now, rather than waiting for cost reductio
defaultns to occur elsewhere first. The answer lies in the inevitably local nature of CCS deployment. While it may of course be possible to import cheaper CO2 capture technology in future ‘from China’ (to take a frequent example), it is 
defaultnot 
defaultpossible to import geo
defaultlogy, nor local geographies for transportation infrastructure. Nor is it possible to radically alter the timetables of current North Sea oil and gas fields experiencing declining production and which would be amenable for use for CO2 storage (either in com
defaultbination with CO2-EOR or post-production). 
default4.6
default              
defaultNeither is it possible to avoid the timetables of investment cycles for existing UK industrial production facilities. The logic of carbon pricing is that CO2 will increasingly be considered as a component par
defaultt of production costs (in addition to the carbon cost of electricity generation), and the pursuit of low-carbon competitiveness will therefore require attention to decarbonise production itself, or face the risk of production capacity re-locating overseas 
defaultin pursuit of lower costs (e.g. of labour) or where more efficient and lower-emitting plant can be built from scratch. In such a context, the deployment and retrofit of CCS becomes a critical job retention technology for industrial sectors in the UK and Eu
defaultrope including 
defaultoil refineries, paper works, steelworks, 
defaultand 
defaultcement production.
default4.7
default              
defaultThe most significant competitive advantage and economic benefit to the UK from continued and accelerated investment in CCS will therefore be two-fold. Firstly, by enabling t
defaulthe decarbonisation of industrial production and associated electricity generation in ways that add value and reduce system costs overall. Secondly, by providing a home market within which the UK’s engineering expertise can address CCS infrastructure integr
defaultation challenges, positioning it ready to export this valuable skills and know-how, just as has been achieved by the offshore oil and gas sector.
default&#xa0;
default5. UK and EU misaligned on projects and policydefault5
default.1 
default              
defaultThe UK’s reputation as a policy innovator and political a
defaultdvocate for CCS has been progressively diminished over recent years.
default 
defaultThe UK should be at the forefront of efforts to improve the CCS policy framework within Europe and globally, both of which would be of immediate practical benefit to the UK. The current a
defaultbsence of proactive engagement on either is resulting in the UK losing its reputation as a leading advocate of CCS.
default5.2
default              
default As the member state best positioned for the deployment of CCS within Europe, the UK’s successes and failures are closely watched by oth
defaulters. Getting it right in the UK matters if CCS is to be deployed more widely in Europe.
default The stripping back of UK financial support for domestic CCS programmes has negatively impacted on practical momentum, while the de-prioritisation of international CCS e
defaultfforts has contributed to the hollowing out of previous strategic efforts and forums such as the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum and Clean Energy Ministerial.
default5
default.3
default              
defaultOn 
defaultprojectsdefault, t
defaulthe failure to secure EU funding from the first round of the NER300 progra
defaultmme was an immense embarrassment, given the leading role the UK played in securing its creation (and delaying its implementation).
default 
default5.4
default              
defaultThe previous Labour government enacted a CCS levy in Energy Act 2010, stated a commitment to supporting 4 CCS projects, 
defaultand introduced a policy of ‘no new coal without CCS’. The coalition government in turn initially expressed its intent to make the UK “first choice for investment in CCS”, before rejecting the CCS levy in favour of the Treasury’s Carbon Price Support mechan
defaultism, and quietly dropping the commitment to 4 projects.
default5.5
default              
defaultIn the interim, the creation of the EU’s NER300 funding mechanism in 2008-09 enabled multiple UK CCS projects to continue development. In 2010-11 the UK was able to put forward 7 CCS projects for 
defaultconsideration (out of 13 in total from across the EU). 
default5.6
default              
defaultThis positive situation was belatedly complemented by the launch of the UK’s current CCS commercialization programme in early 2012. This again received a number of interesting expressions of inter
defaultest (including in ‘part-chain’ industrial and 
defaultinfrastructure projects), however only 5 full-chain projects subsequently entered the UK programme – 4 of which were still in the running for NER300 funding.
default5.7
default              
defaultUnfortunately, the UK was unable to confirm a su
defaultfficiently specific selection of projects or the provision of co-funding in time, and the first round of NER300 closed in December 2012 with funding allocated to 23 renewables projects (2 in the UK), but no CCS projects. The only firm choice taken by the U
defaultK was to de-select the Don Valley project, which had already received €180m from the EU’s EEPR fund, and which had been top ranked by the European Investment Bank scrutiny process.
default5.8
default              
defaultMore recently, the final 4 projects in the UK competition have been whi
defaultttled down to 2 preferred projects and 2 reserve projects. 
defaultAll 4 of these projects (and indeed the Don Valley project too) are high quality projects that are located in strategic locations that could set the UK on track for the development of a core CO2 in
defaultfrastructure to enable wider decarbonisation. Yet only with the announcement of preferred projects did DECC belatedly try to find ways of supporting the continued development of the other projects. This has been too little, too late.
default5.9
default              
defaultThe preferred proj
defaultects at Peterhead (Gas post-combustion retrofit, Shell and SSE) and White Rose (Coal oxyfuel new build, Alstom, Drax, BOC and National Grid) are set to undertake further detailed Front End Engineering and Design studies, due for completion in mid-2014. Fur
defaultther negotiations would then be undertaken with DECC before project award, with a final decision not expected until early 2015. 
defaultThis is too slow, and the current approach is a recipe for the period 2010-2015 being seen to be five wasted years for CCS in th
defaulte UK.
default5.10
default              
defaultThe White Rose project is the sole CCS entrant in the second round of the EU NER300 process, and should therefore be guaranteed additional funding support – provided that the UK government is able to provide sufficient clarity to the European Co
defaultmmission as to its willingness to provide its own funding support. Given previous failures it is imperative that the UK is in a position to take timely decisions on co-funding support. We acknowledge that the level of funding to come from the NER300 is an 
defaultorder of magnitude lower, however the principle of a pan-European effort on CCS was one that the UK advocated and should still be seeking to support. The failure of the second round of NER300 would have negative implications for the inclusion of CCS within
default any similar future funding mechanism, as may be included under efforts to reform the EU ETS.
default5.11
default              
defaultGiven that gas CCS projects are disadvantaged by the EU assessment criteria, the Peterhead project has sensibly decided not to bid for NER300 funding. This h
defaultas had the positive impact of removing a potential point of indecision from DECC, which would otherwise have had to choose between 2 UK projects for its sole remaining funding slot.
default 
default5.12
default              
defaultOn 
defaultpolicydefault, t
defaulthe recently published UK response to the European Commission consultation on CCS failed to take a proactive approach, and failed to support 
defaultemerging policy options (such as CCS certificates) that could advance CCS 
defaulton industrial sources of CO2 
defaultand unlock th
defaulte potential of the North Sea as a hub for European CO2 storage. 
defaultThe UK paper instead repeated the unhelpful 
defaultand simplistic 
defaultposition that CCS certificates would require some form of technology target, and would therefore not be supported. This approach is d
defaultamaging to the UK’s diplomatic efforts on EU climate policy more broadly, not simply on CCS.
default5.
default13
default              
defaultMoreover, it is being increasingly recognised elsewhere in Europe that additional policy measures will be required (at both EU and member state level) to enab
defaultle the deployment of CCS. The UK should be at the forefront of efforts to accelerate this, but instead has retreated into a limited focus on its own Commercialisation Programme and Electricity Market Reform efforts. 
default5.14
default              
defaultThe UK should, for example, be con
defaultsidering how its proposed Emissions Performance Standard could be improved 
defaultthrough the
default integrat
defaultion of CO2 limits on existing plant in line 
defaultEU timetables for
default investment decisions on pollution control equipment. Such an effort would accelerate EU efforts to address the continued operation of existing coal plant, as per the recommendation of the IEA that additional policy measures beyond carbon pricing must be c
defaultonsidered.
default5.15
default              
defaultSimilarly, the UK has much to gain from any enhanced funding mechanisms for the development of CO2 infrastructure, storage characterisation and industrial CCS. A combined CCS certificate / infrastructure fund could supplement limited UK fun
defaultding and provide additional revenue streams for UK projects. Such options should be proactively considered now so that CCS can be positioned as a coherent element of a future EU climate and energy framework out to 2030 and beyond.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default