&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultScienceGrrldefault (WSC049)default1. ScienceGrrl is a broad-based, grassroots organisation celebrating and supporting women in STEM. 
defaultWe formed in June 2012 to produce the ScienceGrrl 2013 calendar - a project to showcase a diverse mix of female role models from a range STEM disciplines and sectors. We 
defaultopened for membership in February 2013 and ScienceGrrl was registered as a company li
defaultm
defaultited by guarantee in June 2013.
default 
defaultScienceGrrl’s
default activities are led by a committee of volunteers with support from our members
default and
default funded through calendar sales, donations, sponsorship, events, merchandising, membership fees and grant awards. We currently hav
defaulte over 200 members and 13 local chapters across the UK. Our chapters provide peer-support for members and opportunities to engage in outreach activities to showcase the real female face of STEM. 
default&#xa0;
default2. This submission 
defaultrepresents input from over 100 people 
defaultfol
defaultlowing 
defaultdirect engagement with our members
default/
defaultsupporters through workshops and a call for evidence. We also requested exit interview data from a number of sources and received this data from Imperial College London for the period covering 2008-2012. Considerin
defaultg that our membership is largely junior (PhD students, postdocs) and that the pipeline is 
default‘
defaultleakier
default’
default at these stages, our submission focuses on issues 
defaultrelating
default to this career stage, specifically: relocation, maternity leave and childcare, career support, and recognition and reward of non-research activities.
defaultRelocation
default3
default. It is well-known that within the pyramid ‘move up or move out’ structure of academic career
defaults, short-term contracts and funding cycles are challenges that
default contribute to uncertainty. There is also a 
defaultperceived ne
defaulted
default to relocate
default.
default This
default pressure
default is illustrated by comments from
default 
defaulta 29 year old female postdoc looking to leave the academic 
defaulttrack
default: “I 
defaultunderstand that in order to progress as an academic, it would be necessary to relocate. I have a long
default-
defaultterm boyfriend in Kent who is unable to relocate. Within the next 5 years, we plan to buy a house, move in together, and marry. Currently, I’m not willing
default to live or work more than 2 hours away from him
default”. 
defaultAnother female lecturer
default tells us that 
defaulthad 
defaultshe not been successful in gaining 
defaulther
default post she would have “left academia as I had reached the point where I could no longer deal with the uncertainty and moving a
defaultround”.
default 
defaultHowever, 
defaultissues of stability do not 
defaultonly affect women. One of our male members 
defaulttold us he had 
default“tired of the nomadic lifestyle which had prevented settling down…..living in different places has been fun, but has totally disrupted my personal life in
default a very negative way. It’s also played havoc with long-term financial stability with regards to pensions and house buying”.
default4. 
defaultPerhaps those who make th
defaulte
default choice
default to relocate
default do so from a position of independence until it impacts upon 
defaulta need for stability
default. Depending on individual timelines, this 
defaultmay be seen 
defaultas
default incompatible with academic progress
default. 
defaultSuccessful international experience is 
defaultalso 
defaultperceived as valuable within academia 
defaultand overseas
default relocation data
default 
defaultmay indicate 
defaultwhether there are gender differences i
defaultn mobility. 
defaultImperial College
default London
default exit interview data for researchers leaving at grades A-C shows that whilst 19.5% of male leavers chose to move overseas to follow an academic career, women were less likely to do so: 11.9% of female leave
defaultrs moved abroad
default for this reason
default. However, an identical proportion (5.8%) of men and women moved abroad for non-academic employment. 
defaultIt would be interesting to know whether this difference was accounted for by more stable long-term prospects.
defaultMaternity leave and childcare
default5
default. The years spent working to secure academic independence and a permanent position are also the years many people choose to
default ‘settle down’ and/or
default start a family. A number of factors seem to influence whether this decision will 
defaultbe seen as suited to
default an acad
defaultemic career. During a workshop at Imperial College London (in association with the Imperial College Science Comm
defaultunication Forum), we heard from
default pregnant postdoctoral researchers that their decision was influenced by the financial position of their partners
default. 
defaultThere was agreement that 
default“salaries in academic postdocs aren’t enough to support a family”. One of the women was looking to leave academia for this 
defaultreason;
default another told us
default that childcare
default “will cost about 70% of my post-tax salary. Certainly, if I had another child, I would have to either give up work or move to a more highly paid job
default”
default. The group observed that many of the male postdocs with children they knew had partners who earned more. 
default6
default. There are inconsistencies in how maternity leave is awarded to PhD students. For example, 
defaultCR
defaultU
defaultK
default 
defaultdefers to the Host Institution
default but all Resear
defaultch Council funded students “are entitled to take 6 months of maternity leave on full stipend and a further 6 months of unpaid maternity leave”.
default We heard from one postdoc who was not eligible for contractual maternity pay because she had not been in employm
defaultent long enough. She reflected that she would have timed her move differently if she had realised
default this
default. Another postdoc says she will be “in a position where my baby is due on November 20
default and my [3 year] contract finishes on November 30
default, after which time I will not be eligible for contractual maternity leave.” 
defaultRC
defaultU
defaultK guidance
default 
defaultGC 9 
defaulttries to address this but 
defaultthe researcher believes she is only eligi
defaultble for statutory maternit
defaulty pay, 
defaultnot the contractual maternity 
defaultpackage
default she could have expected had she become pregnant earlier in her contract.
default 
default7. The University of Leicester 
defaultAthena SWAN
default 
defaultwebs
defaulti
defaultte
default 
defaultstates that it is “possible to either simply extend the grant while the postdoc is on maternity leave and/or continue the programme by appointing maternity cover (within the original cash limit).
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultSTFC/RCUK acknowledged
default that they perhaps need to make sure that these terms and conditions and financial arrangem
defaultents are more widely publicised
default”
default.
default 
defaultG
defaultrant extensions require advance written notification from the grant holder to the funding body. This relies on clear knowledge of policies and may be a weak link. 
defaultWe believe that 
defaultissues around
default disruption to research
default due to parental leave
default, lack of awareness
default of policies and the fact that these issues are not discussed openly contribute to continued confusion and 
defaultconscious or unconscious bias
default. 
default8
default.
default Career breaks are a challenge in academia.
default 
defaultThe Daphn
defaulte
default Jackson Trust
default 
defaultsays:
default “
defaultScientists often feel unable to return due to a wide variety of reasons: lack of part-time or flexible posts, difficulties with childcare, unpleasant and outdated working environments, lack of career progression, secretive and unfair recruitment and
default promotion procedures, to name but a few
default”
default and offers valuable 
defaultcareer re-entry fellowships to tackle the problem
default.
default 
defaultThe Wellcome Trust and British Heart Foundation are examples of other funders offering career re-entry fellowships. 
default9
default. ‘Return to work’ polici
defaultes following parental leave 
defaultare i
defaultnconsistent
default.
default One member, working within the NHS told us: “
defaultI asked to work 3 days a week after my first child was born. This was arranged without any problem”. However, members within academia have spoken
default about unrealistic e
defaultxpectations that they will 
defaultreturn to full time research 
defaultand teaching 
defaultresponsibilities. 
defaultCareer support: advice, mentors and sponsors
default1
default0
default. Another common theme is 
defaulta lack of active and consistent 
defaultsupport
default regarding
default career progression
default.
default 
defaultIf present, this
default 
defaulthas 
defaultbeen attributed to being “with the right supervi
defaultsor at the right time” and professional networks
default:
default“T
defaulthere has not been a significant amount of support in helping me progress in my career. I have had to go out and create my own opportunities” 
default“My current su
defaultpervisor does not mentor me in any way. He is not interested in my academic advancement, nor is he interested in developing my skills as a researcher”
default“I think the lack of a mentor since my PhD has hampered my career progression”
default“Earlier in my career, my 
defaultsupervisor refused to put me on a paper I had contributed a lot of work to because he wanted to be sole author....lack of support has definitely contributed to my desire to leave academia”
defaultWe also heard from 
defaultthose 
defaultwho had a mentor/sponsor and the positive 
defaultimpact this has had:
default“My PhD thesis advisor and postdoc advisor were both very supportive of my career progression providing advice and advertising my work. They were both quite senior figures and their sponsorship no doubt has contributed greatly to my 
defaultacademic success”
default“I had one mentor in San Diego who restored my faith in science, and showed me that it was possible to do it really well without worrying too much about what the mainstream said
default you were supposed to be doing”
default“It would have been great to 
defaultbe able to speak with other women w
defaultho have 'been there, done that'.
default 
defaultB
defaulty joining ScienceGrrl I am starting to get the opportunity to do that, which has given me confidence that I can start a family and continue to have an active career”
default1
default1
default. 
defaultAnother
default thing tha
defaultt has been consistently raised is 
defaultthe lack of 
defaultsenior 
defaultwomen
default to identify with. ‘
defaultSuperwoma
defaultn’ role models are generally seen as intimidating rather than inspiring and our members and supporters would like to see more ordinary women to help ma
defaultke their goals see
defaultm achievable
default. One
default female 
defaultProfessor puts it
default like this
default: “I think that from the outside our lives probably look, to the rising generation of young women, pretty harassed and miserable. That's because they don't see us when we are at home in the middle of the week in our slippers, eating hobnobs and happily wri
defaultting papers! They only see us when we are in our work clothes, rushing off to meetings and generally looking excessively busy. Who can blame them for thinking "I don't want that" when they don't know that "that" also involves getting to every single school
default play, being able to go shopping in the middle of the week so as to free up Saturday for a sports event, or whatever else we get to do as flexible academics. We have a bit of a PR problem, I think, and ought to rectify that”. 
defaultOne of our
default members actively so
defaultught mentoring through WISE “but 
defaultthey couldn't find one for me. I was looking for a senior female academic, but apparently they didn't have any on their books
default. I suspect that lack of mentors is a real problem, and that will partly be because senior academi
defaultcs are already completely crushed
default by their responsibilities - 
defaultespecially the females, who have to be on committees 
defaultetc.
default so that there is at least one female there
default”.
default1
default2
default. Of course, successful mentors and sponsors can be male or female - the important thing 
defaultbeing the guiding influence they can provide and the opportunities they can identify and push younger scientists towards. In a highly competitive setting such as academia, having a champion can increase awareness of opportunities and the confidence to go f
defaultor them. There have been many public discussions about whether women are less likely to push themselves forward for promotion or negotiate than their male colleagues and some companies (e.g. dstl) have changed the way they promote to counter this, allowing
default supervisors to nominate people rather than waiting for people to nominate themselves. One of our members said: “
defaultI was pushed by my boss to move faster and 
defaulttake responsibility before I thought I could - being given opportunities built my confidence”.
default&#xa0;
defaultRecog
defaultnition and reward for non-research activities
default1
default3
default. Another challenge within academia is that 
defaultnon-research 
defaultskills 
default(e.g. leadership, mentoring, 
defaultpastoral care
default, teaching, project/lab management
default)
default appear to be largely ignored when it comes to advancing up the pyramid. Considering the impact sponsorship by a senior scientist can have on a rising career, it is worrying that the presence of this support is largely left to chance rather than being embe
defaultdded into academic culture. We feel that weighting promotions on the basis of wider skills (
defaultand including 
default‘360-degree feedback’) once research calibre has been established would help reward those who contribute to a supportive work culture.
default1
default4
default. This also t
defaultouches on observations our members have made about the type of additional work taken on by women in STEM. It is widely known
default,
default but largely unstated
default,
default that in addition to pursuing their own research, 
defaultPhD students and 
defaultpostdoc
defaults are
default expected to undertake laboratory management activities and train students 
defaultamong other duties
default. Further up the pyramid, administration load and teaching responsibilities are not equally shared. We have encountered much frustration 
defaultthat 
defaultnon-research 
defaultskills a
defaultren’t formally recognised or valued within academia. Anecdotally, our discussions have led us to believe that more women than men take on so-called ‘soft’ responsibilities and that the extra strain they place on ability to progress w
defaultith research activities
default may affect
default career advancement. We have also encountered frustration that 
defaultlack of formal recognition means
default it 
defaultis more difficult to convince other sectors of such capabilities - and this is, after all, the route most people will take. Our members have told 
defaultus that moving to other sectors has required them to “start again” because there 
defaultare 
defaultmisconception
defaults
default about what being 
defaulton 
defaultan academic
default track
default entails: “it’s about more than the research itself but no one seems to realise that”.
default1
default5
default. In terms of other non-research skills, our members have also felt their public engagement work to be undervalued. 
defaultGirls 
defaultand women continue to be underrepresented in STEM,
default and so
default promoting diversity and visible female role models (including in the media) 
defaultis a critical part of inspiring the next generation and expanding the UK STEM skills base. The majority of 
defaultoutreach 
defaultwork is done on a volunteer basis alongside a full time job and other responsibilities. 
defaultI
defaultt is not 
defaultefficient or 
defaultsustainable to 
defaultdepend 
defaulton good
defaultwill alone. 
defaultWhat can be done to address these challenges?
default1
default6
default. 
defaultT
defaulthere is a prevailing culture of confusion in which options and entitlements around starting a family are not clear or openly discussed. Universities and the HE sector should be doing more to 
defaultdiscuss these issues in a positive way, making policy clear to gr
defaultant holders, staff and students
default,
default and
default 
defaultp
defaultolicies should be harmonised across the full range of funding bodies. Policies that tackle investment in childcare (operating hours, waiting lists and af
defaultfordability) are badly needed. In addition, funding opportunities that are exclusively available to those with caring responsibilities
default,
default 
default‘s
defaulttopping the clock’ on academic age during a 
defaultcaring 
defaultcareer break
default and more late career/reentry fellowships
default 
defaultmay help redu
defaultce competitive disadvantage. 
default17
default. 
defaultWe advocate the cultivation of
default an academic environment that more consistently nurtures rising careers
default. 
defaultSupport for formal m
defaultentoring is
default one such approach
default and many institutions have mentoring programmes
default. 
defaultHowever, it 
defaultis 
defaulta significant undertaking and should be 
defaultrewarded and valued 
defaultas such
default,
default perhaps by offering incentives, formal recognition and
default 
defaulttraining
default.
default 
default18
default. 
defaultDoctoral Training Centres 
defaultthat 
defaulthelp incubate young talent
default may be an interesting model
default: a
default 
defaultD
defaulteputy 
defaultP
defaultrogramme 
defaultD
defaultirector at
default one such Centre told u
defaults that their advantages include
default “
defaultthe allocation of staff resources who are committed to deliver a high standards of postgraduate training; peer to peer learning environment; the cohort based teaching and learning; access to a broader
default audiences through the Centre as an interface between academia, industry and society overall”. 
default 
default19
default. Another approach is to e
defaultnsur
defaulte
default 
defaultthat academics who progress
default 
defaultto senior positions 
defaultare not only good scientists but also good leaders and managers
default, which is not
default only beneficial for research environments but also productivity
default. N
defaulton-research skills 
defaultshould be formally recognised and taken into account 
defaultwhen 
defaulthiring or 
defaultselecting people for promotion
default. Recognition would also place value on the many non-research activities
default required 
defaultwithin
default academia and support 
defaultthe 
defaultprogression 
defaultof those moving 
defaultout of thi
defaults 
defaultsector.
default 
default2
default0
default. We also advocate transparency in selection/promotion procedures - and in negotiating pay. Comments from a female Professor support this: “I think the system is 
defaultvery unfair - you can have tw
defaulto equally productive professors, with 
defaultProfessor A could be being paid nearly twice Professor B. Furthermore, because this is all negotiated secretly, Professor B may know nothing about this and think their salary is normal. Thi
defaults isn't hypothetical - I did a professorial pay-productivity review recently (for Athena SWAN) and while pay and productivity generally correlate, there are some notable disparities”. 
default2
default1
default. How the flow of money is managed within academia compared to 
defaultindustry is also something we would like to see examined. We have encountered frustration regarding inflexibility in
default the system
default, for example a female Fellow told us:
default “I can see that Universities are stymied by the limitations on how they can spend money an
defaultd hire people, and by the vast timescales it takes to find money to make new hires. In companies this seems to be easier to fix, because the funding is basically internal. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBut one of the reasons that Universities are so dreadful at all this is that they d
defaulton't feel they can do the logical things to solve the problem, because they don't have the money”. 
default2
default2
default. 
defaultW
defaulte also feel that it is unrealistic to continue telling PhD students and postdocs that an academic track is the only successful way to use their STEM ed
defaultucation and training. 
defaultRetaining talent is important, and investing in a
default new tier of ‘permanent researchers’
default is one approach, but
default there are many successful paths in addition to academia. We believe that it would be useful to reframe the pipeline to include 
defaultthose who move to other primary and secondary STEM careers. With this in mind, our members have told us that they would value better early careers advice regarding awareness of these opportunities, training in how to compete/succeed in other sectors and to
default find ways to ensure qualifications and experiences accrued to date were more formally recognised and appreciated by other sectors. 
default2
default3
default. We would also like to note that many of these chall
defaultenges affect both men and women
default and 
defaultthere is
default 
defaulta need
default to modernise 
defaultacademia
default for everyone. 
defaultClosing comments
default2
default4
default. ScienceGrrl would be happy to provide further information on the points raised here, to discuss them further with the Committee and to recommend oral witnesses or other specialist sources. 
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.cancerresearchuk.org/science/funding/terms-conditions/grant-conditions/studentships/
default 
defaulthttp://www.rcuk.ac.uk/documents/documents/tcfec.pdf
default 
defaulthttp://www2.le.ac.uk/institution/athena-swan/maternity-leave-and-grants/copy_of_maternity-leave-and-grants
default 
defaulthttp://www.daphnejackson.org/
default