&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Pier Logistics And Cardiff University (WSC052)default&#xa0;defaultOverviewdefaultThe recommendations established 
defaultherein derive
default from
default our
default experience as 
defaultacademic 
defaultresearchers whose critical lens has focused on issues of gender in science or STEM in educational and work-placed contexts. Our recommendations therefore are 
defaultdirected at 
defaultaddre
defaultssing
default what we perceive as
default persistent inconsistency and inadequacy
default in the
default experience and
default treatment of women in STEM
default domains 
defaultpredominantly associated with gender-based discrimination.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur interpreta
defaulttion in respect of retaining women in STEM is that 
defaultretainment
default is inextricably linked
default and contingent upon a policy of effective enga
defaultgement and 
defaultrecruitment. Strategies for retaining 
defaultwomen in STEM
default should
default,
default in our opinion, not be limited and/or bound to 
defaultintervention at the stage of Higher Education or employment. Retaining women in STEM is a process which ought to begin long before such juncture. 
default&#xa0;
defaultCrucially, we interpret a process of retaining women in STEM at higher levels, as that which begins with the
default appropriate selection of candidates – but concurrently the widest and most extensive selection process
default linking science to the most heterogeneous and diverse cross-section of scientific ‘
defaultprospectives
default’
default; that which furnishes candidates with 
defaultthe 
defaultrequisite tra
defaultining, knowledge and skills to be the best scientists (regardless of gender) and which renders gender obsolete in the context of scientific excellence; that which does not conceal but makes explicit the harsh reality of the STEM professions
default through the bes
defaultt guidance and advice; and which is underpinned by the mobilization of positive female identities in STEM. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultPrimarydefault recommendationsdefault1.1 
defaultFor purposes of
default stabilizing and ameliorating the part
defaulticipation of women in STEM, primary stakeholders including
default the HE
default sector, Government, industry and b
defaultusiness must assume 
defaultjoint
default responsibility in enabling women in STEM: 
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultbroaden their scientific imagination and powers of envisaging themselves as 
defaultequal, self-efficacious and entitled 
defaultlearners and professionals
default in STEM cont
defaultexts through:
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultby enlarging
default their capacity to emulate yet concurrently elaborate (or build upon) the scientific exc
defaultellence of existing research ‘stars’
default thr
defaultough for instance, mentorship or
default shadowing schemes
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultby drawing on cross-
defaultsectoral
default and cross-disciplinary experiences: learning from outside STEM
default – women in industry and business.
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultby segmenting STEM and considering each
default STEM discipline in re
defaultlation to issues of gender bias and thereby also learning what specific approaches have been deployed across the variety of contexts – in other words, a more precise and bespoke approach to identifying and responding to the needs and 
defaultconcerns of women in STEM
default&#xa0;
default1.2 
defaultFundamentally
default,
default all these aspects require 
defaultgreater linkage and 
defaultintegration in a more joined-up, nuanced and reified discourse
default.
default&#xa0;
default2. defaultHigher Educationdefault and STEMdefault2.1
default 
defaultRetainment
default of women graduates in the Higher Education (HE) sector 
defaultbegins with universities becoming more cognisant
default and self-conscious
default of, and proactive in, their role as catalysts in a supply chain of female science minds. Much of this depends on the strategy of universities in
default continuously
default speaking with and learning from the experience not only of 
defaulttheir staff and 
defaultexisting student cohorts but prospective
default students
default and thereafter
default past staff and
default alumni.
default&#xa0;
default2.2
default Universities and the Higher Education community more generally, must develop a more pro
defaultactive and sustained response to issues of gendered 
defaultdisproportionality
default within the 
defaultprofessoriate
default and across the academic hierarchy.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 
defaultSubscription to the kinds of gender-rebalancing/neutralizing initiatives such as 
defaultAthena Swann 
defaultis definitely useful in te
defaultrms of encouraging greater promotion of the female voice in Higher Education settings. Similarly universities engaged in recruitment policies focused on redressing the balance of gender in their workforce are advantageous. How much however is the implement
defaultation of this kind of gender-promotion ever more than ceremonial and furthermore, how much does intervention of this kind level the playing-field? How much also, might this kind of policy intervention backfire, where a women-scientist is recruited and perc
defaulteives her recruitment to be on the basis of her gender, less her expertise and excellence as a researcher and/or teacher. 
default&#xa0;
default2.4
default The role of the non-STEM based disciplines, such as the social sciences are crucial in leading necessary discussion (and critiqu
defaulte) of issues and challenges indigenous to STEM and in addressing fundamental questions about identity, equality and democracy which scientific innovation 
defaultproblematize
defaults
default. Social scientists must therefore 
defaultbecome
default more conspicuously involved – in 
defaultinter or trans
default-disciplinary ways.
default   
default 
default&#xa0;
default3. defaultEarly initiation in STEMdefault3.1
default 
defaultI
defaultt is not only universities that play an integral part in the 
defaultretainment
default and proliferation of women in STEM. The mantle of responsibility in this instance falls just as much to schools: primary and secondary; teachers; parents and indirectly, peers and othe
defaultr sources of influence and/or inspiration found in informal contexts: museums; science centres; and mainstream media, stimulating and safeguarding the supply chain 
defaultof women in STEM – building instructional and cultural bridges connecting STEM to everyday l
defaultives; providing relevance and raising a sense of belonging, ownership and aspiration. 
default&#xa0;
default3.2
default 
defaultRetaining the supply of women in STEM is inseparably linked to ensuring supply is fluid, fertile and unimpeded. Strategies for retaining women in STEM must therefor
defaulte focus not only in responding to the needs of those in STEM employment or even those enrolled in STEM university courses, but have a life-course vision which begins with the early initiation of prospective female scientists.
default&#xa0;
default3.3
default 
defaultEarly exposure to and imp
defaultlantation of the idea of science as a realistic career choice is indivisible from more women being impassioned with science. Cementing a passion for science begins with early cultivation, almost from 
default‘
defaultyear-one
default’
default, where juvenescent minds begin to engage with
default the plurality and 
defaultdiversity of science in its multiple contexts and iterations, and where a robustness and resolve against the many inequities and gender disparities found in STEM is forged.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default4. defaultBuilding critical massdefault4.1 
defaultThe gendered construction of S
defaultTEM may only fully destabilize, where sufficient numbers of women combine to contest and defeat prejudice and processes which delimit and/or deny their participation, ascent and acceleration in STEM careers.   
default&#xa0;
default4.2 
defaultThe persistence of unequal gendered repr
defaultesentation in STEM, results not only from a lack of consistency in terms of occupational conditions and opportunities by gender, but by the very fact that a lack of female representation in STEM diminishes the audibility and authority of the counter-claim.
default In other words, a culture of resistance that might disrupt discriminatory practice in STEM
default 
defaultdepends on the mobilization of a collective and unified voice of objection. In this context, we believe it 
defaulterroneous 
defaultto isolate and/or quarantine young female learn
defaulters of STEM from the realities of their potential/chosen profession. Female learners should instead be made explicitly aware of issues of unequal and discriminatory gender practice in STEM, yet concurrently, be provided with the necessary tools with which 
defaultto combat and hopefully, overturn all forms of prejudice and inequity. 
default&#xa0;
default4.3 
defaultIt is, in our opinion, albeit well-intentioned, a misplaced strategy to insulate, protect and conceal from female learners and aspirant women scientists the harsh realities of 
defaulttheir occupational futures. A more pragmatic approach is in providing female learners
default and early career scientists
default with th
defaulte right kinds of emotional and intellectual scaffolding
default 
defaultthat will allow them to pre-empt, circumvent or counter the inevitability of ex
defaultposure to forms of work-based gender discrimination. The female collective in science is an essential part of early career support; a key weapon in the armoury against gender discrimination; and the platform from which to fight for and further the rights o
defaultf women in STEM. Quintessentially, the 
defaultretainment
default of women in STEM demands increased recruitment in STEM where a critical mass and the power 
defaultof many enables
default and enforces
default change. 
default     
default 
default&#xa0;
default4.4 
defaultWhilst, important to provide scientific 
defaultprospectives
default with an hones
defaultt and open account of STEM, care and sensitivity is needed in ensuring that candidates are not
default discouraged or
default ‘put-off’ and 
defaultthat emerging ambitions and aspirations are neither quashed or derailed. This may only further damage numbers of girls electing STEM
default subject choices.
default Nevertheless, 
defaultprospectives
default should not assume that a career in STEM will be in any way easy. It will not. False advertisement of this kind is 
defaultperhaps even more deleterious to
default the science community. Crucially, science is not for everyone. N
defaultot every girl
default, nor for that matter
default every boy
default,
default will be well suited to science career. For that matter STEM is not ‘the be all and end all’. Whilst STEM is massively important and provides an indispensable skill set for all learners, we should not presume th
defaultat every child will have interest in science or necessarily want to be a scientist. This is the more tacit danger when pursuing a STEM agenda, not least one among girls. We should not lose sight of the multiple other kinds of occupations outside of STEM 
defaultno
defaultr become so infatuated with its promotion, that we find ourselves recruiting into STEM the kinds 
defaultof individuals whose talents and
default skills are far better aligned to other subject and occupational contexts.
default Nevertheless, increased opportunity-for-learning and
default consideration of a career STEM will redress the existing gender imbalance in STEM careers.
default4.5 
defaultPhysics is one STEM discipline well publicised for its lack of specialist teachers. Subject specialism in STEM is identified as analogous with the quality of cu
defaultrriculum-delivery and thereby the extent to which learners are engaged and a positive learning experience ensures. A correlation is made between effective curriculum-delivery and the specialist as someone with ownership of, investment in, and passion for, 
defaultteaching her/his subject area. 
defaultThose with a passion for their STEM subject will be more likely able to transfer the same kinds of enthusiasm for their subject, than those with a cursory interest. 
defaultHowever, it is also worth considering that specialists may 
defaultb
defaulte prone to overly influence, prejudice or manipulate students’ subject choices and aspirations, where their persuasiveness is acute and where their promotion of their subject is more evangelical than enthusiastic.  
default&#xa0;
default5. defaultDialoguedefault5.1 
defaultThe provision by universities and STEM employers of neutral, supportive and safe spaces for dialogue is a key component of ensuring that where female scientists encounter difficulties in their professional 
defaultlives;
default 
defaultthese are identified and resolved as quickl
defaulty and with as little fuss as possible.
default Dialogue in such
default terms can only help to accentuate a culture of transpar
defaultency, where instances
default of work-place and gender-based discrimination, prejudice, bullying and harassment are
default disclosed, censured,
default 
defaultaverted and/or e
defaultxpunged.
default   
default&#xa0;
default5.2 
defaultDialogue and consultation may 
defaultalso be interpreted
default as interventions which intersect in the context of 
defaultresearch. 
defaultUnequivocally
default, more research, or be that action-research, is required in responding to many of the unanswered or unsatisfactoril
defaulty answered questions related to why women’s participation in STEM continues to be problematic; for the purpose of producing indisputable evidence which policy cannot ignore and must act upon and with; and research which unites all those common to 
defaultthe exper
defaultience 
defaultof gender inequity
default across disciplines and sectoring: empowering and 
defaultforti
defaultfying through collective discourse and shared identity. 
default&#xa0;
default5.3 
defaultFor the purposes of attracting, retaining and replenishing greater numbers of women in STEM and generally for great
defaulter representation of women in STEM at all levels, the perpetuation of a common discourse uniting and permeating all levels of the education and training sector; Government; and industry is pivotal. The promotion of common intelligence and a shared vision f
defaultor women in STEM within/across the ‘triple-helix’ is essential: ensuring that sufficient in-roads are being made not simply in balancing the gender equation in STEM in all domains, but that the best possible candidates are recruited from an equal talent-po
defaultol. 
default&#xa0;default6. defaultCareers-guidancedefault6.1 
defaultWhilst most, if not all, universities are equipped with infrastructure and internal service dedicated to supporting the student experience in pastoral and professional terms, these may in practice tend to be more generalist or ‘catch-all’ in orientation an
defaultd in tackling more rudimentary or procedural concerns. For instance, student 
default‘
defaultinquiries
default’
default may focus more on issues surrounding accommodation, financial support or payment of tuition fees.
default Issues pertaining directly to concerns or grievances in respect of st
defaultudents’ taught experience or professional development are largely 
defaultoutwith
default the remit of these kinds of services – though of course university counsellors, NUS officer
defaults
default may play their part. 
default&#xa0;
default6.2 
defaultThe seem
defaultingly most obvious location for the kinds of advice th
defaultat might facilitate, not only those enrolled on course in STEM disciplines, but students from across all disciplinary domains, are university careers services or professional careers counsellors working within university contexts. 
defaultCareers advice and guidan
defaultce is however potentially compromised by two intervening factors: 
defaulti
default) the degree of confidence and esteem with which students holds such advice ii) the degree of specialisation or lack thereof of the careers counsellor in respect of STEM careers for which t
defaulthere are evidently myriad – STEM counsellors may tend to be more generalist advisers than dedicated specialists iii) the degree to which a counsellor is fully connected with STEM industry partners and therein the involvement of STEM industry graduate recru
defaultiters. Issues in the provision of STEM guidance, which may be correlated to issues of 
defaultselection, 
defaultretention
default/attribution at university and labour-market levels, are not exclusive to universities, but at an early stage of learners’ choice-making. 
default&#xa0;
default6.3 
defaultThere 
defaultis strong evidence demonstrating that the provision of quality advice/guidance enabling students to make the right careers choices in STEM is pivotal. However, the kinds of professional careers advice on offer to many of the UK’s school-children is limited
default and fragmentary and increasingly exported to an online (more cost-effective) interface. One of the major issues in the digitalisation of career guidance is that the interactional basis of a student talking through and thereby thinking through her options 
defaultis lost with a careers counsellor is lost. The misconception of careers guidance is that it is a one-way relationship, with the counsellor engaged purely in 
defaulttransmissional
default and 
defaultuni
default-directional terms. Careers guidance however is or at least should be a
defaultn open
default, unbiased
default dialogue.  What is needed then, are professional careers counsellors, able to engage and dialogue with 
defaultindividuals involved in 
defaultearly, intermediate and 
defaulton-going
default 
defaultcreative imaginations
default about
default their personal/professional identities, aspirations etc. 
defaultThe careers counsellor is th
defaulterefore a key component of such
default deliberative exercises that focus and orient an individual’s formative development as a learner, accruing new knowledge and skills and a heightened awareness of the opportunities and obstacles tha
defaultt might expedite or impede 
defaulttheir maturation as STEM learners or scientists.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default7. defaultRole modelsdefault7.1 
defaultMuch has been made of the use of successful female scientists as role models for the purpose of attracting and retaining greater numbers of women in STEM. 
defaultSame-sex role models or ambassadors in STEM are advocated for their contribution in
default rescuing,
default rehabilitating and mobilising the mind-sets of those contemplating STEM subject choices/careers governed by misassumptions regards to their suitability for a STEM
default career, purely on the grounds of gender. 
defaultSenior STEM role models offer evidence that women can achieve real success in STEM contexts and rise to positions of authority and high office. The effectiveness of senior role models may also however be potentiall
defaulty compromised by a lack of 
defaultaspirational
default-proximity or in other words a sense that their achievements, when contextualized amidst the paucity of their numbers, appear even more exceptional, out-of-reach or through the more sceptical lens, 
defaultserendipitous
default. In t
defaulthis context, senior role models whilst offering ‘proof-of-concept’ also demonstrate the arduousness of the STEM career for women, and a sense that even limited success will be hard-fought – and not according to principles of meritocracy or 
defaulta 
defaultlevel playing 
defaultfield of opportunity between the sexes.
default&#xa0;
default7.2 
defaultWhere role models
default’
default powers of persuasion in convincing younger women of the potential of a career in STEM are in such way enervated, the role model concept itself should
default not
default necessarily be abandoned but rethought
default and revised. 
defaultOne immediate thought is in reconsidering the 
default‘
defaultpedestal
default’
default approach, moving away from the elevation of the role model as a star – the exceptionality of this approach being alienating less enticing. Whilst remaining faithful to recognising and e
defaultxploiting the achievements of women in
default STEM for the purpose of good public relations
default – role models might exist at every level of the academic hierarchy and not only the 
defaultprofessoriate
default. This would require a flat-hierarchy system of rewards and recognition sy
defaultstem designed to identify and celebrate the successes of the entire academic community from undergraduate to postdoctoral researcher to professor. 
default&#xa0;
default7.3 
defaultFemale STEM champions across all academic hierarchies would serve to magnify the focus of female succes
defaults in STEM and concurrently provide improved accessibility – through localised and proximal 
defaultexperience ‘between’ and ‘across’ researcher/teacher cohorts
default. In another sense the proliferation of female STEM champions across a flat hierarchy will contribute to 
defaultthe visibility and prominence of critical mass as opp
defaultosed to the isolated champ
defaultion
default – externally to STEM 
defaultprospectives
default.
default Internally, b
defaultolstering a sense of 
defaultcollective identity and 
defaultcommunity of 
defaultwomen in STEM, will 
defaultameliorate a sense of legitimacy and credibilit
defaulty
default and foster a sense of affiliation and thereby ownership.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default