&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted defaultby Newcastle University (WSC055)defaultExecutive Summary
default1. Newcastle University
default1.1 Newcastle University is a member of the Russell Group of universities.  The University has over 21,000 students and more than 5,000 staff
default.  The University is commi
defaulttted to 
defaultdeveloping a fully inclusive University community which recruits and retains talented staff and students from all sectors of society equally.
default1.2 The University is an active member of Athena SWAN being awarded a bronze renewal award in 2013 and has
default relevant Schools and Institutes which have achieved, or are working towards, awards.  In addition, the University is rolling out the principles of Athena SWAN to non STEMM institutes in the University.  The University ensures monitoring and analysis of ge
defaultnder as an education provider and an employer and seeks to identify and tackle inequities.
default1.3 For these reasons the University is keen to respond to this inquiry.
default2. Why do numbers of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the career ladder?
default&#xa0;
default2.1 Career pathways from postgraduate to researcher to lecturer can be insecure, particularly at the researcher stage.  Research staff often have to deal with short term contracts due to funding constraints. If a woman is planning to have a family, she may
default seek a more secure role with long term funding to enable a return to the workplace.
default2.2 Inevitably there are fewer lecturer roles to move into from a research role.  Research is often not perceived as a career option in itself; when harnessing the skills 
defaultof research staff who do not wish to progress to lecturer positions could be of great benefit to the organisation.
default2.3 Women aspiring to progress need visible role models to look up to and emulate, there is a lack of such role models.
default2.4 Progress from res
defaultearcher to lecturer can be greatly enhanced with the benefit of a mentor or visible role model, however there are fewer senior women and female mentors are not always available for women seeking to develop their careers in academia.  There is no reason why
default a female should not have a male mentor, but a senior male academic is less likely to fully appreciate the impact of work and family responsibilities women frequently have to deal with.  In addition, people tend to mentor those they can relate to and can f
defaultoresee a similar career path  to that which they have achieved; as more senior staff are male, there is the possibility that more young males will benefit from mentoring.
default2.5 Unfortunately, academia tends to be associated with long working hours in order to be perceived as achieving, many women carry out most of the caring responsibilities in families and so are often unable to work as many additional hours as their male co
defaultunterparts.  Similarly the ability to attend conferences and to collaborate both  nationally and internationally are often seen as measures of success; as the main carers, many women do not have the necessary support mechanisms in place at home to enable f
defaultrequent travel.  
default2.6 Experience at a variety of institutions is often looked for by universities when seeking to employ staff, many women if choosing to have a family and a career are not geographically mobile and so their experience may be perceived as l
defaultimited.
default2.7 Fixed funding for research is not always used to enable flexibility.  Often a Principal Investigator’s key focus is getting the research done within the limited time allowed, a female researcher who has a period of maternity leave can be seen a
defaults an interruption to the continuity of research, and as creating the additional requirement to find and train a replacement for maternity cover.  Staff seeking flexible hours to enable family and work balance can be seen as not being sufficiently committed
default.
default2.8 Unconscious bias may also be a factor, in recruitment, selection and promotion there can be a tendency to choose people like yourself, if it is mostly senior staff making recruitment, selection and promotion decisions and most senior staff are male, 
defaultit follows that many successful candidates will be male.
default3a. When women leave academia, what careers do they transition into? 
default3a.1 Some women  leave academia to spend time at home with family, and choose not to return to the workplace.  Many women 
defaulttransition into administrative roles, some staying within academic institutions.  Many women seek employment in more secure positions, for example in industry.
default3b. What are the consequences of scientifically trained women applying their skills in different
default employment sectors?
default4a. What should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and PhD students in academic c
defaultareers?
default4a.1 Universities and the higher education sector should demonstrate from the outset that women are valued in the organisation and encouraged to fully develop their potential.  This message needs to start 
defaultfrom the point of encouraging undergraduate
default applicants to the university, throughout study and employment.
default4a.2 Research funding is often linked to time constraints.  Principal Investigators need to be open to the benefits of the skills of female researchers, and not be swayed by the possibility of
default maternity leave occurring.  If there was consistency of approach from research funders with regard to providing funding for maternity leave this would demonstrate a real commitment to supporting women balancing work and a family.  It would be helpful if r
defaultesearch funders were more flexible with regard to considering alternatives if maternity leave does occur, for example extensions of funding and time to enable a female to take the maternity leave she wishes without fear of the impact on her career prospect
defaults and job security.  Research funders and Principal Investigators should be open to flexible working options and the variety and value this can add.  As research funding is usually time limited, research funders and Principal Investigators need to enable t
defaultime and support for women when they need to start planning their next move.
default4a.3 It is necessary to have a culture where equality and diversity issues are embraced and ideally embedded in everyday working.  Organisational culture also needs to be one where
default individuals are prepared to tackle instances of inappropriate behaviour and practises.  Universities need to be prepared to identify areas of inequality and take appropriate action to work towards a positive study and work environment for women.
default4a.4 Stru
defaultctured career advice and support needs to be available for women.  Although a challenging career, there are many benefits from a career in academia; these benefits should be promoted to women.
default4a.5 Ideally a culture change in academia where it is not perce
defaultived as necessary to have to put in extra hours to succeed should be enabled.  This would help all academics, male and female to achieve a healthier work life balance.
default4a.6 There should be sufficient flexibility to arrange key University business activitie
defaults at times that suit the needs of the business and enable attendees to meet their caring responsibilities.
default4a.7 Support networks for women to share ideas and provide mutual support for their development are extremely beneficial and should be available to s
defaulttudents and staff at all stages in their careers.
default4a.8 Many research staff, both male and female want research to be their career, not to progress to lectureships incorporating teaching and scholarship duties.  At present research is not a secure career op
defaulttion.  Universities; culturally, organisationally and financially should look at research as a valuable career option and put mechanisms in place to enable this.
default4a.9 Universities need to visibly champion and promote female role models.  Formal and informa
defaultl mentoring programmes with senior female mentors should be established.
default4b. Are there examples of good practice?
defaultExamples of good practise at Newcastle University:
default5. What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers? 
default5.1 Linking Athena SWAN to funding has undoubtedly focussed m
defaultinds on the issue of women in academic STEMM careers, the Government needs to ensure that the good work being done to achieve 
defaultAthena SWAN success is no
defaultt just done to ensure future funding, and assess whether real change is being enabled on a long term basi
defaults.  The Government also needs to ensure that where accreditation is required that sufficient funding and resources are given to the accreditation bodies.  Government recognition and reward for those that are achieving progress in this area would send a cle
defaultar message.  Government funding for mentoring, networking and training programmes would also be welcomed.  
default6. Recommendations
default6.1 Enabling culture change to bring about an environment where gender equality is the norm.
default6.2 A new way of managing research 
defaultfunding to encourage more flexibility and job stability.
default6.3 A mechanism  to assess the effectiveness of schemes such as Athena SWAN, ensure recognition and reward where progress is achieved and maintained.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default