&#xa0;
defaultWiSET Submission to the Science and Technology Select Committee Enquirydefault into women in academic STEM careersdefault.defaultExecutive Summarydefault1. WiSET is based within the Centre for Science education (CSE) at Sheffield Hallam University. We are a longstanding and 
defaultexperienced academic and practitioner team working in the field relating to gender, STEM and education along the whole pipeline.
default2. The 'leaky pipeline' phenomena is a useful way of identifying pressure points at which to address the shortfall of girls and
default women taking up and progressing in STEM. But the under-representation of women at higher levels of academia is part of a wider societal problem. The STEM sector has a number of specific issues relating to women
default that are longstanding and complex. There nee
defaultds to be a broad, holistic and sustained approach to addressing the issues drawing on work and evidence from recent interventions.
default3. STEM skills are actively sought by many sectors outside STEM. But as the numbers of women are already low, a macho STEM ac
defaultademic culture will drive more women out when STEM should be encouraging them to stay. The sector needs to change, not the women.
default4. The higher education sector is fortunate. The ECU Athena SWAN Charter has been built upon sound foundations and is helping 
defaultto achieve culture change in the institutions that commit to change. Universities need to be encouraged to make themselves accountable and commit to change.
default5. Government needs to lead a strategy and draw from the evidence it has already. The work of the U
defaultKRC (WISE), the Scottish Government investment and the role of the Public Sector Equality duty are all essential parts of a wider approach to change. 
defaultThe Government needs to lead by example.
defaultThe Responsedefault1. Who we are, what we have done. How does our exper
defaultience help us contribute to the enquiry?
default1.1. WiSET aims to encourage women and girls into STEM and the built environment, to increase rates of recruitment, retention and progression of women to help meet the needs of the economy. We work at all stages of 
defaultthe 'pipeline' from schools, colleges, university, in work and we work with all stakeholders and girls and women themselves. 
default1.2 We have a national reputation for interventions in the field of gender equality and STEM.
default We started in 1998 and went on to wo
defaultrk in partnership with the UK Resource Centre for Women in SET. We work in partnership with many organisations and institutions with an interest in gender and science
default.
default1.3 We work at the beginning of the STEM pipeline - so we have experience of how to wide
defaultn access in science for girls. We understand the complexity of the issues that limit progression for girls and women. We work in our own university to support the Athena SWAN Charter and have experience of supporting change in gender equality in STEMM subj
defaultects. SHU was one of the first new universities to receive a Silver Departmental Award.
default We work with women who have left STEM careers and want to return but find it difficult, so we have understanding of the barriers they face.
default1.4 Our knowledge and experi
defaultence built up over fifteen years provides us with a special insight into the concerns of the Select Committee.
default1.5. We work with girls and women at all stages of the pipeline, so we understand the issues they face and we see them happening. We know how har
defaultd it is to tackle bullying within an academic department, we know how hard it is to balance work and family satisfactorily and we know the career disadvantages of working part-time.
default2. Why do numbers of women in STEM academic careers decline further up the
default career ladder?
default2.1 The problems faced by academics reflect the wider societal problems of women's progression in their careers. 
defaultThe lack of representation of women at higher decision
default-making
default levels is one in most professions and in public life. The Select 
defaultCommittee needs to draw on wider research about how to address career progression of women. T
defaulthe work recently done by the Women's Business Council
default is very relevant and needs to be utilised
default for this review
default.
default2.2. Having acknowledged the general problems in 
defaultthe UK, the nature of academia and STEM subjects do in themselves present additional barriers to women that are experienced in many other countries as well as the UK.
default2.3 Academia 
default2.3.1 The competitive nature of academia can be alienating to women (and me
defaultn). The focus on personal promotion of one self above others, leads towards a 'macho' and secretive work culture that discriminates against women.
default The pernicious long-hours culture that exists within higher education in teaching and research, can prevent w
defaultomen from even entering the race for promotion.
default2.3.2 Promotion procedures often lack transparency or appear to be managed unfairly, with 'the old boys
default'
default network' operating to exclude women.
default 
default2.3.3 There have been a number of research studies of the 
defaultposition of women in academia and of course, the Equality Challenge Unit (ECU) will supply detailed information.
default2.4 STEM
default2.4
default.1 The initial low numbers of women in some STEM subjects (physical sciences, maths, computer science, built environment) immediate
defaultly limits the number of role models or visible women further up the career ladder. But even in subjects where numbers are high initially, for instance biological sciences
default, the numbers decline quickly as you mount the career ladder.
default2.4.2 The insecurity of 
defaultresearch contracts has been long recognised and the work following the Roberts' Review
default by the Research Councils and 
defaultinterventions and research commissioned by the UK Resource Centre for Women in SET (UKRC) 
defaulthas gone a long way to addressing 
defaultunderstanding o
defaultf 
defaultthe problems overall
default. This can be connected to women who have partners with better pay, o
defaultr as the need to manage work alongside
default family responsibilities
default (which remain largely the role of women).
default.
default2.4.3
default The experiences of STEM female researchers and students has been explored by the RSC and the UKRC
default which found that while male and female students disliked the work culture, the males tended to endure it, hoping for better times ahead, while female resear
defaultchers left STEM. I remember a female student who confirmed this experience. She loved her first degree in chemistry, did well and started a PhD at another university, but had a dreadful experience and was bullied by her supervisor. She completed her PhD bu
defaultt then immediately moved to teaching chemistry because of her experience.
default2.4.4 The paucity of women available to participate in STEM recruitment panels and on committees can cause overload to the few who are there or just reinforce the perception that wom
defaulten do not progress. STEM Departments are not brave enough to take positive action and think creatively to address these problems.
default3. When women leave academia, what careers do they transition to? What are the consequences of scienti
defaultfically trained wome
defaultn ap
defaultplying their skills in different employment sectors?
default 
default3.1 This section of the 'leaky pipeline' is another significant point that should be taken seriously. Of course the benefit to other sectors employing women with STEM qualifications is well referenced.
default STEM skills such as project
default management and 
defaultanalytical skills are all appreciated in other sectors.
default3.2 Research shows
default that women who leave STEM will often move to sectors where employment is more flexible (public sector), where conditions and terms are m
defaultore family friendly (for instance teaching).
default3.3. Women who leave STEM to take a career break experience particular problems in returning to STEM. Whilst the Research Councils have promoted a range of measures to address the inequality faced by women in pu
defaultblications records because of starting a family for instance, these issues of unfair comparison 
defaultagainst those (usually men) who do not take up a family career break 
defaultstill remain.
default3.4. The women we have supported to return to STEM are usually working in low
default pay jobs or they are well over qualified for the role they take up. This is sometimes due to confidence levels being low after being out of work or STEM, but it is often also because they sacrifice their career aspirations for their partner - to follow th
defaultem in their promotion or to take up family caring duties. While there are companies that 
defaultactively 
defaulttake on STEM couples (Schlumberger an
defaultd Volvo for instance) and manage this in a positive way we have little experience 
defaultof 
defaultdoing 
defaultthis in academia.
default There are du
defaultal careers, but they are rarely actively planned and encouraged.
default4. What should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and PhD students in academic careers? Are there examples of good practice?
default4.1 The higher education se
defaultctor could learn from the experience of some high profile STEM companies that take gender equality seriously. Through the UKRC schemes to badge gender equality there are a number of case studies that could be drawn on.
default4.2 The Athena SWAN Charter scheme m
defaultembers and Award holders have a wide range of good practice to draw on. The Athena SWAN Charter, previously funded through the UKRC and now owned by the ECU is a well regarded strong example of how the Higher Education sector has begun to take notice of ge
defaultnder equality. 
default4.3 The collection of data and data monitoring is the foundation upon which gender equality and change to culture can be founded in STEM higher education. 
defaultAll universities should maintain disaggregated data. 
defaultIdeas for culture change and pra
defaultctice to change masculine and macho cultures within higher education are not simple. 
default4.4. The nuances between different STEM subjects' needs and problems (for instance - psychology and engineering have very different cultures), the differences between par
defaultts of the higher education sector (traditional Russell Group and new universities), are all taken account of within Athena SWAN. While the driver linked to funding also applies an additional motive to Vice Chancellors who feel they have no need to do more.
default5. What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers?
default5.1 The Government should set an example of gender equality in its own STEM institutions. We
default would suggest that
default many 
defaultgovernment led 
defaultgroups, committees 
defaultand
default public bodies within STEM do not have a sufficient
default representation of women, nor do they have a policy of promoting gender equality
default to address the issue
default.
default 
default5.2 
defaultThe Scottish Government have shown the way for women in STEM academia
default. Their 
defaultimplementation of
default and investment in the 
defaultTapping the Talents
default recommendations 
defaultthrough the Scottish resource Centre and the Institutions 
defaultis to be applauded.
default 
defaultA central role in coordination needs to be a long term strategy. 
defaultThe UK Government should lead a 
defaultsimilar 
defaultstrategy for 
defaultthe UK drawing on the STEM professional institutions and stak
defaulteholders. The curtailing of the central role of the UKRC was too soon for mainstreaming.
default5.3
default. WiSET
default were involved with work to improve gender equality in public bodies and worked with the Cabinet
default Office and the Commissioner to introduce mentoring, improve recruitment practice
default and promote vacancies to women (as part of the UKRC brief). This has ended and should be reintroduced in order to practice what is being required of others.
default5.4 The Governmen
defaultt need to continue to support the Public Sector Equality Duty if the excellent progress made by the Research Councils, RCUK and the ECU is to 
defaultbe 
defaultcontinued. Without this support, the position of women in STEM academia is likely to be worsened.
default5.5
default 
defaultThe Gover
defaultnment should look for research evidence beyond this current Parliament. The short period of public investment in women in science, engineering and technology since the Roberts Report and the Greenfield Report have produced a significant body of evidence th
defaultat we know can bring success. Government do not need to reinvent the wheel, but build on 
defaultthe knowledge and success we
default (WiSET) and others (WISE, WES) already have.
defaultContact detailsdefaultDr Pat Morton, WiSET Team
defaultCentre for Science Education, Sheffield Hallam Univ
defaultersity, Sheffield S1 1WB
defaultemail: 
defaultp.m.morton@shu.ac.uk
default Tel: 0114 225 4695
defaultwww.wiset.org.uk
default 
default5
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://womensbusinesscouncil.dcms.gov.uk/
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.vitae.ac.uk/policy-
defaultpractice/1685/Roberts-recommendations.html
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.rsc.org/images/womensretention_tcm18-139215.pdf
default 
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/32378/11-770-stem-graduates-in-non-stem-jobs-executive-summary.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://oro.open.ac.uk/19189/
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk/documents/equality/GPGworkplaceculture.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.royalsoced.org.uk/cms/files/advice-papers/inquiry/women_in_stem/tapping_talents.pdf
default 
default