&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWridefaulttten evidence from Involve [OD0default10]default&#xa0;
default1default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThis is defaultInvolve’sdefault submission to the Public Administration Select Committee question paper on “Statistics and Open Data”.default We have focused our submission on the potential of open data to make public institutions more transparent, accountable and democratic.default2default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultGovernment Ministers have emphasised the importance of open data for accountability and democracy on a number of 
defaultoccassions
default. We argue that while open data does indeed have the potential to be used to support enhanced accountability and democracy, that this will only be the case if a set of conditions are in place for it to be so.
default3default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe argue against a perspective of open data that sees it as an intrinsically positive force for accountability and democracy. The extent to which open data is important for these ends is inextricably linked to its use, and there are significant barriers in the way of its potential being realised.
default4default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultTherefore, if open data is to fulfil its potential for enhancing accountability and democracy, the Government needs to expand its approach from releasing data to building the necessary support for its widespread use.
default5default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe draw on Tiago 
defaultPeixoto’s
default (World Bank) work exploring the uncertain link between open data and transparency, adopting his Accountability Mechanism which sets out a minimal chain of events needed to ensure that the accountability element of open data functions fully.
default6default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe build on 
defaultPeixoto’s
default framework by drawing upon our research into how and why citizens participate, offering a number of suggestions of actions the Government should consider taking to support the accountability mechanism at each stage.
default7default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe conclude that 
defaultopen data is often seen within the specific
default frame of transparency, but
default if its potential benefits of open, accountable and democratic government are to be reaped, it must also be considered within a frame of participation. As such, the Government must focus considerably more attention on supporting citizens and civil society to engage with the data it releases.
default1.1.default This is 
defaultInvolve’s
default submission to the Public Administration Select Committee question paper on “Statistics and Open Data”.
default1.2.default Involve
default are experts in public participation. We believe passionately in a democracy where citizens are able to take and influence the decisions that affect their lives. Through both research and practice we seek to radically transform the relationship between citizens and their governments to better use the creativity, energy, knowledge, skills and resources of all. 
default1.3.default Involve exists to support organisations, politicians and public officials to transform the way they engage with citizens. Since Involve was founded in 2004 we have worked closely with public organisations at a local, national and international level to transform how they engage with citizens.
default1.4.default Our interest in statistics and open data lies 
defaultin its potential to
default support the opening up of government
default – making public institutions more transparent, responsive and accountable to, and supporting the participation of citizens
default. Since October 2012 we have coordinated the UK Open Government Partnership civil society network
default - a l
defaultoose grouping of civil society organisations working with and challenging the Government to make stretching commitments and take firm action on open government through the international Open Government Partnership.
default We
default have focused
default our submission, therefore, on the potential of open data to make public institutions more accountable and democratic, and what is needed to support such outcomes.
default As such, we have chosen to address the questions that best fit this perspective.
default1.5.default This call for evidence has 
defaultcome at an opportune time
default as we will shortly be publishing a report on the links between open data, participation and democracy. Our submission therefore summarises a number of the points that we will make in greater deal in that report.
default2.1default.default Government ministers, including the Prime Minister, have emphasised the importance of open data f
defaultor accountability and democracy o
defaultn a number of 
defaultoccasions. T
defaulthey have
default, for example,
default lauded the ability of open data to empower citizens to hold their governments to account, suggesting that open data will lead to more effective democracy:
default“These are the first formative years of this new Age of Open Data. And there are risks and challenges ahead. But the prize is effective personalised 21st century democracy. Transparency will create empowered citizens that can expose corruption, get the best value out of their governments and have equal access to valuable raw data.”
default Francis Maude (30 January 2012)
default2.2default.default More specifically, Ministers have 
defaultspoken of their vision of an army of armchair auditors poring through government data
default, scrutinising the efficiency and effectiveness of services,
default and holding government’s feet to the fire:
default“So we’re going to rip off that cloak of secrecy and extend transparency as far and as wide as possible. By bringing information out into the open, you’ll be able to hold government and public services to account. You’ll be able to see how your taxes are being spent. Judge standards in your local schools and hospitals. Find out just how effective the police are at fighting crime in your community. Now I think that’s going to do great things. It’s certainly going to save us money. With a whole army of effective armchair auditors looking over the books, ministers in this government are not going to be able to get away with all the waste, the expensive vanity projects and pointless schemes that we’ve had in the past.”
default David Cameron (29 May 2010)
default2.3default.default Open data
default however
default, as Government Ministers have stated on a number of occasions, is a resource. 
defaultAs such, t
defaulthough it is often tied to normative values of government openness and transparency, open data itself is neither intrinsically positive nor negative. As with any resource, it has the potential to be put to use (or not) for
default a range of different purposes.
default2.4default.default Therefore, the extent to which open data is important – and for what – is inextricably tied to its use. As we wil
defaultl set out below
default, the treatment of open data as an intrinsically positive force for accountability and democracy gets to the nub of the weakness of the Government’s approach to the open data agenda. Open data can be important for accountability and democracy, but only if a set of conditions is in place that supports it to be so.
default2.5.default 
defaultEvidence and experience suggest that t
defaulthere is indeed potential to use open data to make public institutions more transparent and accountable to citizens. The development of digital technology has created new potential to collect, distribute, manipulate and collaborate on vast datasets that before now was not possible. The potential of open data, from a democratic and accountability perspective, lies in the opportunity for citizens and civil society to be able to scrutinise and interpret government data and to combine it with their own data in order to better understand what and how government is doing, and to better influence and/or challenge the decisions it takes. As Tim Davies set out in a recent article for 
defaultSciencewise
default-ERC: 
default“In a complex state, where the scale of information held inside Government grows exponentially with the rise of vast databases and digital-by-default services, access to data may be the only way for citizens to effectively exercise oversight of Government.”
default2.6.default The challenge of open data lies
default, in part,
default in the fact that data by itself is meaningless. To be usable and useful information for citizens and civil society to hold government to account and take part in democratic 
defaultconversations
default, data must first be appropriately selected, contextualised, analysed and presented in a meaningful way. This requires a certain level of expertise both in analysing and manipulating data, as well as in the subjec
defaultt area to which the data refers – 
defaultknowing where to look, what to look for and what to do with it once found are 
defaultessential.  
default2.7.default Therefore, while open data has the potential to be important to accountability and democracy, there are significant barriers in the way of that potential being realised. 
defaultIt is apparent that open data requires some level of intermediation in order for the majority 
defaultof citizens to be able to understand and engage with it. Media and civil society are able to play this role, to a certain extent, at a national level. However, this is not without its risks
default and it is much less clear how this is expected to happen at a local or individual level.
default2.8.default This is not to suggest that there are no cases of citizens and/or community groups using open data. Through our research into the links between open data, participation and democracy we have collected together a number of examples of open data being used at a community level to scrutinise and challenge government. However, these isolated examples are remarkable for their apparent rarity, as well as for the particular qualities of those involved. 
default2.9.default Therefore, if open data is to fulfil its potential for supporting accountability and democracy, the Government needs to expand its approach from releasing data to building the necessary support for its widespread use.
default3.1.default The Government has 
defaultplaced significant emphasis on “getting the data out”
default. However, if open data is to fulfil its accountability and democratic potential, the government must broaden its focus from the release of open data, to supporting citizens and community groups to engage with it.
default3.2.default There appear to be two rationales from government ministers for this focus. On the one hand, there is concern from Ministers to get data out as quickly as possible for fear that the system will stiffen and start to resist the open data agenda. The extent to which this is a valid argument is debatable. An alternative perspective would be that failure to develop the demand side for open data leaves the agenda much more open to retrenchment.
default3.3.default On the other hand, Ministers appear to suggest that getting the data out will be a sufficient condition for its widespread use by citizens and civil society:
default“The simple task of putting spending online will open the doors to an army of armchair auditors who will be able to see at a glance exactly where millions of pounds spent last year went. The public and the press can go through the books and hold Ministers to account for how taxpayers’ money is being spent.”
default (Eric Pickles, 
default12 August 2010
default)
default3.4.default As we set out in the previous section, this has certainly not been the case to date. Rather, the literature on the links between open data and accountability, and our previous research into what is needed for individuals to participate, suggest the need for a much more developed and rounded approach. T
defaulthe release of data is just the first step in a chain of events that is needed to move from open data to enhanced accountability and democracy.
default3.5.default In an article titled ‘The Uncertain Relationship between Open Data and Accountability’,
default Tiago 
defaultPeixoto
default (based at the World Bank) sets out a series of steps that need to be taken to ensure that the accountability element of open data functions fully. 
defaultPeixoto
default builds on the propositions of Yu and Robinson in their article 'The New Ambiguity of Open Government'
default by arguing that participatory mechanisms must be built into the accountability mechanism when opening up data.
default3.6.default 
defaultPeixoto’s
default accountability mechanism argues that for open data to lead to accountability requires a minimal chain of events: 
default3.7.default The first of these events – 
default‘Government information is disclosed’
default – is the “getting the data out” step. Here Government must strike a balance, as it chooses where to focus resources, between the quantity and quality of datasets. We will not focus our attention here, but we should acknowledge that the setting up of open data user groups has been a positive step by government in determining priorities for disclosure. The Government should build on this by developing further opportunities for citizens and civil society to influence which datasets are prioritised for disclosure.
default3.8.default The second event – 
default‘The disclosed information reaches its intended public’
default – acknowledges that simply publishing data is not an adequate means of ensuring that it reaches its intended audience. 
defaultPeixoto
default notes that scholars define the publicity condition as 
default‘the extent to which disclosed information actually 
defaultreaches and resonates
default with its intended audiences’
default. 
default3.9.default First, in order for open data to 
defaultresonate
default with citizens and community groups, our research into how and why people participate suggests that it must be clearly applicable to an individual’s personal motivations.
default However, the evidence suggests that the public currently do not understand how open data applies to them or what they care about; research into public awareness of open data has found that awareness is low in part because open data is perceived as an abstract issue, with unclear benefits to everyday life.
default Open data needs to become a readily accessible resource to which individuals and community groups automatically turn in order to support their participation. For this to happen, both Government and civil society need to demonstrate the benefits and efficacy of open data.
default3.10.default Second, in order for open data to 
defaultreach
default citizens it needs to be available in the places they already participate and interact with government. “Engage where people are” has become a mantra for many public participation experts after numerous failed attempts at the Field of Dreams – “build it and they will come” – approach. Likewise it 
defaultneeds to become a mantra for the open data movement. While the use of open data repositories, such as data.gov.uk, makes considerable sense for disclosing large quantities of data to data experts, they are unlikely to be visited by the average citizen. There is, however, the potential for government and civil society to get information to citizens in the places that they already visit – be it online (e.g. paying for their TV license) or offline (e.g. in a GP surgery waiting room). Whether or not individuals feel inclined at the time to use that data, g
defaultradually increasing the 
defaultdegree of familiarity with data –
default how it might be used and its potential usefulness
default –
default may encourage individuals to access and use it 
defaultwhen an issue resonates with them.
default3.11.default The third event in the accountability mechanism – 
default‘Members of the public are able to process the disclosed information and react to it’
default – emphasises the need for citizens to be able to interact with open data. Our research into how and why individuals participate identified the importance of an individual’s resources, including their skills, expertise and confidence; their social networks, both personal and professional; and the local groups and organisations in their communities to if and how they participate.
default 
default3.12. defaultThe Government should consider where it has the potential to influence the development of these supporting conditions. This could include exploring with civil society actors ways of: 
default3.13.default Finally, the fourth event in the accountability mechanism – 
default‘Public officials respond to the public’s reaction or are sanctioned by the public through institutional means
default’
default – 
defaultemphasises that there must exist a system through which citizens can sanction, reward and/or collaborate with public officials based on their use of the data. 
default3.14.default A group at the 
defaultUKGovCamp
default 2012, led by Tim Davies, co-director of Practical Participation, and open data research coordinator at the Web Foundation, developed the ‘five stars of open data engagement’ as a set of guidelines for government bodies and other organisations in how best to publish data in order that citizens can fully engage with it. The scale is underpinned by the belief that a commitment to open data by government should mean that information and data resources are made 
default‘accessible to all without discrimination’
default and should 
default‘ensure that information and data can be used in a wide range of ways’
default.
default3.15.default The ‘five stars of open data engagement’ are as follows:
defaultOne star: Be demand drivendefaultTwo stars: Provide contextdefaultThree stars: Support conversationdefaultFour stars: Build capacity &amp; skillsdefaultFive stars: Collaborate with the communitydefault3.16.default The Government should adopt and build on this scale to support the development of the demand side of open data, alongside the development of the supply side. In addition, it should explore opportunities for linking up open data with existing consultation and engagement channels and exercises, as well as developing new mechanisms through which citizens can communicate and collaborate with policy makers.
default3.17.default To conclude, open data is often seen within the specific frame of transparency. However, if its potential benefits of open, accountable and democratic government are to be reaped, it must also be considered within a frame of participation. As such, the Government must focus considerably more attention on supporting citizens and civil society to engage with the data it releases.
defaultSeptember 2013
default11
default 
defaultwww.involve.org.uk
default 
default 
defaultww
defaultw
default.opengovernment.org.uk
default 
default 
defaultwww.opengovpartnership.org
default  
default 
defaulthttp://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/news/francis-maudes-speech
default-
defaultworld-bank
default 
defaulthttp://www.number10.gov.uk/news/pms-podcast-on-transparency/
default Davies, T (2013) 
defaultTransparency and open data
default. 
defaulthttp://www.sciencewise-erc.org.uk/blog/?p=1682
default 
default The need to contextualise data
default 
defaultc
defaultreates the potential for 
defaultit
default to be misused by persons looking to 
defaultsupport a particular point of view.
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/news/eric-pickles-shows-us-the-money-as-departmental-books-are-opened-to-an-army-of-armchair-auditors
default 
default 
defaultPeixoto
default, T. (2013) ‘The uncertain relationship between open data and accountability: A response to Yu and Robinson’s 
defaultThe New Ambiguity of “Open Government
default”. 
default60 UCLA Law Review Discourse 200
default: 
defaulthttp://www.uclalawreview.org/?p=4497
default 
default 
defaultYu, H &amp; Robinson, D.G. (2012) ‘The New Ambiguity of “Open Government”’. 
default59 UCLA Law Review Discourse 178:
default 
defaulthttp://www.uclalawreview.org/?p=3663
default 
default 
defaultBrodie
default, E; Hughes, T; 
defaultJochum
default, V; Miller, S; 
defaultOckenden
default, N; &amp; Warburton, D. (2011) 
defaultPathways through participation: What creates and sustains active citizenship?
default London: NCVO, IVR &amp; Involve. 
defaultwww.pathwaysthroughparticipation.org.uk
default 
default 
defaultSciencewise
default-ERC (2013) 
defaultPublic views on open data
default. Harwell: 
defaultSciencewise
default-ERC 
defaulthttp://www.sciencewise-erc.org.uk/cms/public-views-on-open-data/
default 
default 
defaultBrodie
default, E; Hughes, T; 
defaultJochum
default, V; Miller, S; 
defaultOckenden
default, N; &amp; Warburton, D. (2011) 
defaultPathways through participation: What creates and sustains active citizenship? 
defaultLondon: NCVO, IVR &amp; Involve. 
defaultwww.pathwaysthroughparticipation.org.uk
default 
defaultDavies, T. (2012) 
default5-Stars of Open Data Engagement?
default 
defaulthttp://www.timdavies.org.uk/2012/01/21/5-stars-of-open-data-engagement/
default 
default