&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence sdefaultubdefaultmitted by defaultDr defaultGemmadefault Sweeneydefault (WSC063)defaultPosition: Daphne Jackson Fellow, University of Huddersfield, Queensgate, Huddersfield, HD1 3DH
default&#xa0;
default1.
default              
defaultAfter a significant career break to bring up three children I anticipated that it would be unlikely I could secure a new position
default wit
defaulthin the chemical industry which would be both flexible enough to fit with my family, but also at 
defaulta similar level
default to that
default which
default I had previously achieved. However, whilst considering my options I became aware of the 
defaultDaphne Jackson Trustdefault, which aims to help 
defaultscientists return to their careers following a break, at an appropriate level, and with flexible part-time working.
default2.
default              
defaultAfter investigating this enormously valuable opportunity more fully, I approached Huddersfield University as a potential host, and submit
defaultted a full application. After submitting a peer reviewed proposal and interview,   I was delighted to be appointed a Daphne Jackson Research Fellow earlier this year. The Trust secured funding on my behalf, partly from the University of Hu
defaultddersfield, and p
defaultartly from
default the
default EPS
defaultRC.
default3.
default              
defaultI would like to submit evidence to this Government 
defaultinquiry into women in STEM careers because I want to emphasise how valuable the Daphne Jackson Trust has been to me. Without this opportunity, it would have been highly unlikely I 
defaultwould have returned to a career i
defaultn s
defaultcience, partly because of the decline in the Pharmaceutical Industry of late
default (and thus the number of positions for chemists has reduced significantly)
default, and partly because after such a long career break I would not be con
defaultfident of applying for a position for which I am qualified. In addition, the flexibility in working and part time hours
default 
defaultmeans that I can fit my career around my personal life. Fellows are given support in their return to work, in the form of (re)- training
default courses, and by being given a mentor. The position is for two years and I am confident that on completion of the Fellowship I will be in a position to return to my STEM career.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default