&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence
default from Flybe (TIC 073)
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default1.1 
defaultFlybe is Europe’s largest regional airline and the UK’s number one domestic airline. Employing more than 2
default,5
default00 staff,
default the Flybe brand c
defaulturrently operate
defaults
default 
default190
default routes from
default a total of
default 112 departure points, 34 UK and 78
default European airports
default in 
default23
default countries and carried more th
defaultan 7 million passengers in 2012.
default&#xa0;
default1.2 
defaultI
defaultncluded within the Flybe brand is o
defaultur franchise partner, Loganair, who serve the
default geographically isolated communities of the 
defaultHighlands and Islands
default. Loganair operate their aircraft in Flybe livery and fly 27 routes from 11 airports
default,
default with four
default 
defaultof its 
defaultintra-UK
default routes covered by 
defaultPublic Service Obligation (PSO) agreements.
default 
default&#xa0;
default1.3 
defaultWhile the 
defaultc
defaultall for evidence focusses solely on bus, rail and car, 
defaultFlybe believes there is an important role for 
defaultaviat
defaultion in providing reliable 
defaultand frequent transport services for 
defaultisolated
default communities
default.
default This response aims to briefly outline the importance of air services for those communities and is something 
defaulton which 
defaultwe 
defaultwould be h
defaultappy to provide oral evidence
default should the committee think it would be helpful.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default2.1 Aviation, in contrast to most other forms of public transport,
default 
defaultpays its own way
default and i
defaultn terms of infrastructure investment – both by airports and airlines – the industry receiv
defaultes little or no public subsidy.
default&#xa0;
default2.2 
defaultWe we
defaultlcome the government’s announcement establishing the 
defaultRegional Air Connectivity fund
default,
default but the £10million being set aside to support 
defaultto ensure that regions outside the Hig
defaulth Speed Rail 2 network will
default benefit from stronger transport links
default is small beer compare
defaultd to the public
default subsidy given to rail and bus.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 We support the government’s 
defaultcommitment to re-balancing the economy away from the south-east and believe that greater support for regional aviation 
defaultcan be an important tool in that rebalancing.
default 
defaultFlybe has commissioned a study from Oxford Economics to explore the impact of regional aviation and connectivity on GDP, the relationship between regional aviation and growth, inward investment, business supply-chains, tourism and employment. The report wi
defaultll be 
defaultready in the autumn and we trust 
defaultwill help 
defaultinform the debate.
default&#xa0;
default2.4 
defaultA measure of how the regions – not only ‘isolated’ communities – have lost connectivity over the years is best exemplified by the statistics relating to access to London Heathrow airport. 
defaultOnly six UK cities (Aberdeen, Belfast, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Mancheste
defaultr and Newcastle) 
defaultcurrently 
defaulthave access to Heathrow, compared to some 20 airports
default (in
defaultcluding the likes of Inverness, Newquay, Plymouth and Humberside)
default 
defaultthat 
defaulthad such access in 1990
default. 
default&#xa0;
default2.5 
defaultWe fear that 
defaultwithin two years London Gatwick will have gone the same w
defaultay
default, given 
defaultthe CAA’s failure to uphold Flybe’s complaint against London Gatwick’s owners following price rises of 102% over a five year period. Despite the plainly unreasonable and discriminatory nature of such rises, the CAA concluded that Gatwick’s object
defaultive in restructuring its charges to ‘increase the efficient use of its s
defaultingle runway’ was justifiable. 
default&#xa0;
default2.6 The challenges that isolated communities face as a result are even greater, given the need for two and sometimes three flights to reach an internat
defaultional destination. Airlines like ourselves try to assist our passengers wherever possible by operating direct routes to 
defaultinternational hubs, such as Exeter to Paris CDG or Inverness to Amsterdam. This enables them to access global airports and negates the n
defaulteed for hours spent on the road driving to say London Heathrow or Birmingham. 
defaultMore direct routes could be introduced were the funding available.
default&#xa0;
default2.7 Another alternative Flybe has developed is the Manchester hub.
default Intro
defaultduced in March 2012, we
default created a regi
defaultonal network hub by optimising scheduling options through Manchester airport, meaning that Flybe passengers instantly benefitted from an additional 86 regional point-to-point connections.
default 
defaultBy working with Manchester Airport to streamline connectivity and re
defaultduce minimum connecting times to as little as 35 minutes, Flybe significantly added to the choice of our domestic flights, giving passengers an affordable choice of multiple day returns throughout the UK. While the hub can never be, and does not seek to be
default, a rival to Heathrow, it has created a long-haul alternative to for the UK’s regional communities, allowing them to access flight connections to the rest of the world offered from Manchester Airport.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default3.1 
defaultAir Passenger Duty is a barrier to economic growth. It is well documented that the UK has the highest aviation tax in the world – a seriously short-sighted policy for an island nation. Indeed, the government themselves have explicitly acknowledged that APD
default constrains demand, evidenced by their decision 
defaultin 2011 
defaultto approve a reduction in Continental’s APD from Belfast International to Newark in order to retain the service.
default&#xa0;
default3.2 
defaultAs can be seen from the table below, the numbers of UK domestic air 
defaultpassengers has
default fallen by more than a fifth
default since 2007-08. While this drop has been in part the product of the recession and continuing economic challenges, the fact that APD for a domestic flight was £5 per passenger per flight in 2007-08 and is now £13 per passenger pe
defaultr flight has undoubtedly had an impact.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultYeardefault&#xa0;
default2007-08
default&#xa0;
default2008-09
default&#xa0;
default2009-10
default&#xa0;
default2010-11
default&#xa0;
default2011-12
default&#xa0;
default2012-13
default&#xa0;default07/08 – 11/12 defaultTotal domestic passengersdefault&#xa0;
default25,326,857
default&#xa0;
default23,579,169
default&#xa0;
default22,060,930
default&#xa0;
default20,275,085
default&#xa0;
default20,172,440
default&#xa0;
default19,970,996
default&#xa0;default- 21.1default%default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3.3 
defaultFlybe commissioned an 
defaulteconomic analysis by Oxera examining the regional impact of APD in 2011. The study showed, amongst many other conclusions, that a reduction in APD for the regions, but not London, would have relatively little impact on London itself - mainly because the pr
defaultoportionate impact on regional airports of a small percentage of passengers switching from London is quite substantial
default for those regional airports
default. We would be happy to share the full report with the 
defaultCommittee
default.
default&#xa0;
default3.4 
defaultWe argued strongly in our response to th
defaulte Treasury’s 2011 consultation that any reform of the banding structure of APD must remove the inherent unfairness that means UK domestic passengers pay the tax on both legs of their journey, while those flying abroad pay just once.  The fact that, for exa
defaultmple, a return passenger travelling between Glasgow and Belfast City (208 miles) pays double the tax that someone flying between Glasgow and Dalaman in Eastern Turkey does (4,086 miles) is inequitable. 
default&#xa0;
default3.5 
defaultAlthough the government decided against such an 
defaultamendment, Flybe still believes that this ‘double hit’ must be addressed in order to safeguard UK domestic aviation and UK 
defaultregional economic competitiveness. The practical effect of APD on a predominantly domestic operator 
defaultlike Flybe was that, during 2012-
default13
default, the airline paid some £
default70
default million in APD to the Treasu
defaultry, some 18% of our UK ticket revenue.
default&#xa0;
default3.6 
defaultAPD is, of course, not the only barrier to growth for the industry – excessively high airport landing charges, the recession and the stubbornly high cost 
defaultof fuel all make for a challenging environment – but it is something that impacts more heavily on UK airlines than their European counterparts. As the biggest airline at Inverness airport, Flybe and its passengers clearly benefit from the current exemption
default on APD. However, it seems only reasonable that the impact
default on other transport isolated
default areas of the UK, for example
default Northern Ireland and Cornwall are a
defaultfforded similar exemptions
default and we would encourage the Committee to bear this, and the other points outlin
defaulted above, in mind during its deliberations. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default