&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultSt George’s, University of London (SGUL) (WSC078)default&#xa0;
defaultSummary
default- defaultSGUL
default is an institute of higher education and research directly impacted by Sally Davies announcement linking funding to Athena Swan status
default- The process of applying for Athena Swan funding has been a 
defaultpositive experience, and we recommend government commit to maintaining the link between funding and accreditation.
default&#xa0;defaultIntroduction
default1. We are pleased to respond to the Science and Technology Committee (Commons) inquiry into Women in STEM Careers.  We hope 
defaultthis information is useful to you as you work on your review.
default&#xa0;defaultAbout SGUL
default2. SGUL is a college of the University of London training medical, biomedical science, nursing, radiography, and physiotherapy students.  Our award-winning undergraduate and graduate
default recruitment schemes ensure the next generation of health-care workers reflects our community.  SGUL is also a post-graduate research institute, specializing in translational research 
default&#xa0;defaultImpact of Sally Davies announcement on SGUL
default3. We would like to thank 
defaultSally Davies for her concrete commitment to gender equality in science.  In particular, we fully support her announcement regarding the future link between measurable improvements in institutional equality and NIHR research funding.  The requirement for an
default Athena Silver award impacts directly on our institution, as NIHR is a significant source of our income.  We are able to make a stronger case for important
default improvements as a direct result, as summarized below.
default&#xa0;
default4. Our initial application for an Athena Bro
defaultnze award was submitted in November 2012.  We received useful feedback from the Athena Swan committee, and it has been very valuable to compare ourselves to other institutions.  
default&#xa0;
default5. Our next submission for an Athena Bronze award will be in November 2013, 
defaultand this has been given high priority at the management level, and is discussed on all key committees.  Quality data has been collected regarding staff job descriptions, promotions, recruitment and flexible working.  This data was previously not available 
defaultand has flagged up areas of concern.  Transparency regarding senior committee appointments and decision making is improving.  A wide variety of actions has been implemented or will be proposed in our bid in order to support the working environment for wome
defaultn at SGUL.  These include job descriptions, promotion and recruitment processes, role models, mentoring, networking opportunities, flexible work plans and maternity leave.  In addition to the required Self-Assessment Team, we also have a large group of ent
defaulthusiastic volunteers for our Athena Swan Action Group.
default&#xa0;
default6. SGUL acknowledges that we are still in the early stages of our aim for an Athena Silver Award, but progress so far is encouraging.  The direct link between future funding and the Award has focussed
default minds and ensured support from a broader range of SGUL staff and management.
default&#xa0;
default7. We anticipate that Athena Swan will in the future extend to include ethnic diversity.
default&#xa0;defaultRole of Government
default&#xa0;
default8. Linking research funding to an accredited programme for departme
defaultntal or research institutions regarding the role of women (such as Athena Swan) should be mandatory.
default&#xa0;
default9. Research councils set the funding and the research agenda.  They should have policy statements on funding equality, and release information on grant aw
defaultardees at least annually.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default