&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault defaultThe Institute of Marine Engineering, Science &amp; Technology (IMarEST)default default(WSC080)default1. Executive Summary
default1.1 The losses known as the ‘leaky 
defaultpipeline’ are not usua
defaultlly the result of women choosing
default no
defaultt to progress their careers. Those who wish to succeed will do so. However, this requi
defaultres a supportive employer and the 
defaultwillingness for an employer to offer women the opportunity to progress.
default1. 2 Th
defaulte issues facing women in STEM careers are not necessarily specific to STEM. Many of the issues apply to women across all careers and are related to work life balance and the consequences of having a family.
default1.3 There are specificities in a career in marine
default STEM that make it even harder for women to succeed compared to ot
defaulther STEM careers. These include
default disproportionately low numbers of women in all roles and the additional challenges of working offshore or at sea.
default1.4 Role models in STEM are vital. These rol
defaulte models must be carefully selected. There is a perception that many of the role models in Marine STEM have got to high level positions by compromising; by not having a family or by becoming “one of the boys” having the opposite effect.
default2. Introduction
default2. 1 
defaultThe 
defaultIMarEST is the international professional body and learned society for all marine professionals, a registered charity and the first Institute to bring together marine engineers, scientists and technologists into one international multi-disciplinar
defaulty professional body.
default2.2 
defaultIMarEST is the largest marine organisation of its kind with a worldwide membership based in over 100 countries and provides grades of membership for everyone, from those seeking to become 
defaultchartered
default or gain other Professional Recogn
defaultition, to those just starting out in their careers or studying in education.
default2.3 
defaultThe IMarEST is submitting this response to the select committee on behalf of its membership, in particular its female members. The IMarEST specifically requested input from fe
defaultmale members by a direct email request but also welcomed comments from m
defaultale members with 
defaultthe opportunity to contribute 
defaultmade 
defaultthrough the IMarEST website.
default  Members were specifically asked to answer the questions from a Marine 
defaultSTEM perspective addressing the
default 
defaultadditional challenges facing
default women in the workplace 
defaultassociated wi
defaultth working offshore and at sea.
default2.4 
defaultThe IMarEST currently has 
default427 female members
default comprising
default just over 3% of the tota
defaultl membership. Only 1.5% of members
default registered as Chartered Engineer
default (CEng)
default 
defaultthrough the IMarEST are women. However, around 35% of those re
defaultgistered as Chartered Scientist
default (CSci) 
defaultthrough the IMarEST are women
default 
default(
defaultconsistent with 
defaultother Science Council licenced
default bodies
default)
default.
default This implies the issues facing women in 
defaultmarine e
defaultngineering are even 
defaultmore pronounced than in
default marine science and t
defaultechnology.
default  
default 
default2.5 A
defaultlthough they are no figures available on the total numbers of women working in the UK in marine STEM the numbers
default are
default assumed 
defaultto be low 
default(particularly at 
defaultmiddle to senior management 
defaultlevels
default)
default given
default global trends
default.  According
default to the International Transport Workers' Federation (ITF) 
defaultw
defaultomen make up only an estimated 2%
default (23,000 individuals)
default o
defaultf
default the world's maritime workforce. Women seafarers work mainly in the cruise and ferries sector, often for Flags of 
defaultConvenience (FOC) 
defaultvessels
default which means they are subject to the labour laws (or lack of) of the country to which the ship is registered
default. 
defaultThe ITF report that t
defaulthese are among the worst paid and least protected of 
defaultall 
defaultjobs at sea. Women also tend to be younger,
default and fewer are officers than their male crew mates.
default The ITF report that 
defaultthe low number of women employed means that it is inevitable that discrimination and harassment will occur.
default2.6 I
defaultn Marine Science the Intergover
defaultn
defaultmental Oceanographic Commission of 
defaultUNESCO (IOC of UNESCO) reported that around 25% of representatives
default (comprised of senior figures in Ocean Sciences in the UN member states)
default at its recent G
defaulteneral Assembly were women. The commission itself
default have a femal
defaulte Executive Secretary
default and a secretariat 
defaultof 30% female. However, this number drops to 9% if only the technical secretariat staff are considered (
defaulti.e.
default those actively working in STEM roles)
default2.7 P
defaultrofessional membership
default bodies, particularly those in e
defaultngineering have long been seen 
defaultas Gentleme
defaultn’s club
defaults. In accordance with guidelines being issued 
defaultby organisations such as Women i
defaultn Science and Engineering (WISE) and th
defaulte Royal Society of Edinburgh i
defaultns
defaultt
defaultitutes such as the IMarEST are examining the way they recruit and retain female members and support them t
defaulthrough their careers. This is being done in hand with other initiatives such as the International Maritime Organizations “Women at the Helm” and the IOC’s proposed “Network of Women”.
default2.8 
defaultIMarEST members who responded to the call for evidence are at differ
defaultent stages in their careers from students through to managing direc
defaulttors. They are employed across marine engineering, s
defaultcie
defaultnce and t
defaultechnology in the public, private and academic sectors. Most are based in the UK but some are based overseas or have experienc
defaulte in working overseas. There was an equal split in response between those members who have children and those who do not.
default The evidence provided is largely anecdotal as no formal studies have been carried out.
default3. Why do numbers of women in STEM academic car
defaulteers decline further up the career ladder?
default3.1 
defaultBalancing a family with a work life is seen as the
default biggest cause of this decline.
default 
default 
defaultS
defaultome women 
defaulthave no choice but
default to permanently leave to bring up their families.
default  T
defaulthere are often fewer opportunities for STEM 
defaultjobs to be carried out as part-time roles and/or to allow flexible working arrangement for those women who want to return after maternity leave.
default This was perceived to be more of a factor in academia than in the public of private sector where the metrics us
defaulted to judge success in academia are challenging.  Being less able to travel for work because of family commitments can seri
defaultously hamper career progression. This is particularly relevant in
default marine science when scientific research cruises may be days, weeks 
defaultor even months in duration.  Presenting at conferences
default (normally overseas)
default and working in collaborative projects are near impossible 
defaultfor women with young children 
defaultand opportunities for informal networking with peers are missed. Senior academics and manager
defaults want to be able to send their staff to events to raise their organisation’s profile and will be reluctant to employ women who can’t travel for extended periods. 
default In addition, the 
defaulttemporary/short term funding model for research gives very little security,
default which is, again, non-conducive to starting a family. 
defaultWith the focus on high output of high-quality journal papers as the measure of success (of individuals and universities) this also puts extra pressure on women who take time out for family commitments.
default3.2 
defaultThe culture of academia was questioned and those members who worked in academia, particularly overseas, reported that most senior academics are seen to work evenings and weekends and most would not take anywhere near their annual leave allowance.  For 
defaultwoman who have, or are wanting to have a family
default, 
defaultthis culture makes it extremely difficult to stay in academia. 
default 
default3.3 
defaultMembers commented that 
defaultthe academic environment is often aggressive, without offering compensation in terms of job satisfaction. There is 
defaulta general belief that individuals are working against one another and constructive criticism can be harsh and a demonstration of ‘one-upmanship’. This contributes to a feeling that part time working and parental leave is frowned upon and will compromise a 
defaultwoman’s career.
default3.4 
defaultThe hierarchy is very male dominated and perceived as unsympathetic to young females entering academia.  There is a lack of female role models. On the occasions when female supervisors were experienced, it did not seem that these women 
defaultwere particularly interested in supporting other women in STEM, giving the i
defaultmpression that incoming female students and post-docs were a threat, and treating them with hostility
default. In many cases men were seen as better role models within academia. However, t
defaulthere is a lack of mentoring 
defaultlevel
default for women
default that men typically receive, both formally and informally. This may be because there is some stigma against senior men associating with junior women (either real or perceived).
default3.5 
defaultS
defaulttatistically, successful women 
defaultare more like to be in a dual career couple, and the challenges inherent within this are more likely to result in the woman rather than the man tailoring back their work
default with mothers normally the primary care giver
default. Correspondence in Nature (
defaulthttp://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v4/n4/pdf/ngeo1113.pdf
default) supports this 
defaultwithin the field of 
defaultphysical oceanography, where the women to men ratio 
defaultis decreased
default higher up the academic ladder
default in the U
defaultS
default. What is most worrying is that the 
defaultwomen/male ratio
default has decrease
defaultd
default in the last
default 20/30 years or so and the report concludes that
default&#xa0;
default“First, family relationships affect women’s academic careers more than men’s. Academic women typically have a spouse employed fu
defaultll time, and women with children are less likely to enter the tenure track than men
default”
default 
default3.6 A
defaultcademic careers frequently require people to move across countries or continents, and women, who are more likely to be in dual career couples, are therefore more lik
defaultely to be penalised by this, as they are statistically more likely to be earning less than their male counterpart and may also have additional childcare responsibilities. If couples wish to stay together geographically, it is statistically more likely that
default the women’s career will suffer, rather than the man’s.
default3.7 
defaultThere is evidence in an u
defaultnconscious bias in job promotion/hiring. A study in PNAS (Moss Racusin et al., 2012, 
defaulthttp://www.pnas.org/content/early/2012/09/14/1211286109#aff-1
default) showed that both men and women research scientists showed bias in favouring male applications over female 
defaultones (only name changed). The sexism exhibited was unconscious, as scientists would 
defaultgive other reasoning for their decision. We need more awareness of this, so that a conscious effort can be made to overcome any such bias; obviously there are academics who would want to change this, if only they knew they were doing it!
default3.8 
defaultWomen often un
defaultdervalue their ability and their academic potential.  It is common to hear from women with an academic background that they didn’t feel they were ‘good’ at it.
default3.9 
defaultAcademia still suffers from an image problem – young, female graduates do not perceive acade
defaultmia as a profession.  It continues to be seen as a continuation of the student lifestyle, descending into the wearing of knitted tank tops and an ever diminishing range of focus.
default 
default3.10 
defaultFinally, there were those members who simply chose to leave academia fo
defaultr
default reasons unrelated to gender. T
defaulthey simply did not wish to
default follow an academic career and 
defaultwished to take a 
defaultjob in industry where the knowledge was applied more directly
default. Additionally, 
defaultacademic 
defaultcareers are
default unlikely to offer the same financial rewards as working in industry at a senior level. Depending on the industry you work in,
default&#xa0;
defaultbenefits such as promotion, bonuses, recognition from your client(s), opportunities 
defaultfor CPD 
defaultmay happen in faster timelines than i
defaultn 
defaultacademia. 
defaultWomen 
defaultin particular 
defaultmay feel they want this faster route especially if they are planning to have a break to have a family.
default4. 
defaultWhen women leave academia, what careers do they transition into? What are the consequences of scientifically trained w
defaultomen applying their skills in different employment sectors?
default4.1 
defaultAll those responding to the call for evidence were still employed in STEM careers within
default the marine sector
default 
default(
defaultoil 
defaultand gas majors, RN
default, shipping companies and consultancies for example
default)
default.  Many rep
defaultorted they found
default resistance to women doing engineering and 
defaultproviding 
defaultscientific advice 
defaultin the maritime sector and 
defaultoffshore where it is still a male dominated society.
default&#xa0;
default Going into 
defaultmanagerial aspects of work and became a project manager rather than a scienti
defaultfic specialist
default was seen as an only option for career progression.
default4.2 
defaultThe consequences of employing women in different, 
defaulti.e.
default "non-typical" sectors e
default.
defaultg
default.
default shipyards is positive in all directions. It is good for the traditional men to meet intelligent women. I
defaultt is character building for the intelligent women to meet traditional men. It is beneficial for the industry to draw employees from a wider pool of humanity.
default4.3 
defaultThe same problem occurs for women p
defaultrogressing up the career ladder
default in industry as in academia 
defaultin that 
defaultit tends to happen at the same time
default as they will wish to start a 
defaultfamily. Most higher-
defaulttier j
defaultobs require full time working particularly if it involves managing junior staff
default.  
defaultEven if a part time, flexible working pattern can be established this often
default mean
defaults women simply work longer, non-
defaultcontracted h
defaultours in order to 
defaultcomplete what is l
defaultikely to be a similar workload 
defaultto someone working full time. If not already employed
default by a supportive employer when starting a family
default, part time, flexible opportunities are 
defaultdifficult to find.
default4.4 
defaultMost engineers work in the private sector, where there is very 
defaultstill very 
defaultlittle precedence of part time working patterns, particularly in the higher tiers. Public sector employers (
defaulte.g.
default the NHS and Education Boards) are more able to
default cope with part time working patterns, hence 
defaultone of the reasons why 
defaultfemale doctors and senior teachers are much more prevalent than female engineers.
default&#xa0;
default4.5 
defaultThe perception is that i
defaultf a woman takes time out of her job when her children are young she will find
default it difficult to progress to a higher grade when she returns. She will find it easier and more "flexible" to remain at that gr
defaultade. M
defaultanagement are happy to have a talented woman in a medium grade position and will accommodate her needs for occasional sports
default 
defaultday / parent teacher meeting and for non-standard hours 
defaultso long as she stays in that position. They will not, 
defaulttypically, 
defaulthowever, consider her for boardroom positions. The industry therefore loses the benefits of that woman's scientific training, experien
defaultce and ability when recruiting to its top positions. Eventually the woman will get tired of remaining at the same grade and will be lost to the industry completely.
default4.6 
defaultSome of the more senior members who responded to the consultation commented that 
defaultbetwee
defaultn 20 and 30 years ago t
defaulthere was a lot more discrimination. 
defaultAlthough positive steps have been made there is a legacy 
defaultthat far less women in their 50s have spent the past 30 years working
default their way up the career ladder as men,
default so 
defaultthere are not many available
default in senior positions
default. Although there may be many more young women around now at lower levels, they do not tend to have any women in the chain of command above them. When they look upwards, what do they see – an all-male line. Many have no female role model
defaults in their company. They get discouraged, and leave to join a company with a better track record for promoting women.
default4.7 
defaultWithin the maritime and offshore sector there are perceived excuses for
default discrimination. For example, on offshore platforms t
defaulthere are o
defaultften no female toilets and 
defaultoften only 
defaultcommunal showers
default. Men regard offshore platforms as a male preserve where they 
defaultcan carry out activities that are not acceptable in mixed g
defaultender employment. In addition, 
defaultmany 
defaultoffshore
default platforms do 
defaultnot have single rooms
default. 
defaultAccommodation is very tight and beds cannot afford to be left
default empty. Some 
defaultcompanies 
defaultget 
defaultaround it by only employing women in even numbers. (There are often female catering and cleaning staff, 
defaultwhich
default the female engineers can be paired with). Others pair a wo
defaultman with a man who is on a different shift, so that they are never in the cabin at the same time. Others use it as an excuse not to take women at all. 
default4.8 
defaultIn the 
defaultm
defaultaritime sector there are very few females in the senior positions, both on board ship and as
defaulthore.
default O
defaultne of the better shipping companies, who offer opportunities to young female cadets, still only have 1 female chief engineer on their fleet of ships and no female captains. Ashore there are very few
default female Superintendents and wome
defaultn appear mostly in 
defaultpersonnel and human resources roles.
default4.9 
defaultThe maritime sector differs hugely to most other industries in that it requires workers to work away from home for extended periods which does not lend itself kindly to raising children. There is not a lot that ship
defaultping companies can do about this
default. H
defaultowever
default,
default they should offer other opportunities within the company so that while a woman raises her family she may be able to work in a shore based role and should be given 
defaultevery
default opportunity to do so, such as relocation, 
defaultet
defaultc.
default - which is not uncommon in other shore based industries.
default&#xa0;
default4.10 
defaultAll seafarers, not just women have been impacted by Government policy for example the removal of
default 
defaultseafarer’s
default tax to name the most obvious.
default4.11 
defaultThe seagoing commitment of all RN personnel was
default also raised as an issue and there was no desire to see a return to when women were on a separate 'non sea going' tier.
default However
default, what
default is needed 
defaultare
default more options.
default&#xa0;
default A
default 
defaultcredible alternative to 'stay and go to sea' or 'have a child and leave'
default choice that currently exists
default.
default&#xa0;
default Thi
defaults choice 
defaultis the clearest and most obvious reason for the
default 
defaultstark
default 
defaultpaucity of
default 
defaultfemales in senior positions in the RN. Additionally,
default if STEM qualified RN personnel 
defaultleave to find more family friendly employment there are
default 
defaultfew, if
default any,
default 
defaultopportunities to start a second career in the STEM employment sector that are
default 
defaultwilling or open to either part time or sufficiently flexible working patterns.
default&#xa0;
default It is too easy for employers to find similarly
default 
defaultqualified men without the working time restri
defaultction.
default4.12 
defaultFinally, there was comment that 
defaultwomen are in a similar po
defaultsition to men in this instance. W
defaultith the current economic situation, many graduates choose careers based on whatever they can get rather than what they might prefer. More females appear t
defaulto go into teaching roles 
defaultalthough many 
defaulthave been forced to leave the science sector due to a lack of jobs. The jobs available often require previous experience which is difficult to obtain when no one is willing to employ you in the first place. 
defaultBecause of
default this, some women may end up in the r
defaultetail or care industry which is
default more female dominated.
default&#xa0;
default5. What should universities and the higher education sector do to retain women graduates and PhD students in academic careers? Are there examples of good practice?
default5.1 
defaultUniversities need to demonstrate that they do not discriminate against women who want both a career and a family.  The men in these professions tend to have both, so women should be afforded the same opportunity.  
defaultA zero tolerance policy of sexism 
defaultshould be instigated and well publicised within academic centres.
default5.2 
defaultAnti-sexism training/guidance should be conducted/issued amongst the (predominantly male) professors in the position of supervising female students. 
defaultAwareness of promotion/hiring bias sh
defaultould also be considered. 
defaultFemale professors should be encouraged to act as role models for women entering academia, and actively support other women.
default5.3 
defaultInstitutions should give greater precedence to the work of women academics, championing contributions f
defaultrom the early phases of academia, and providing the opportunity for female academics to discuss and raise issues they face on an annual basis with the board of directors.
default Women should be directly encouraged to apply for more senior roles within institution
defaults.  Institutions should ensure that women are directly targeted for internal vacancies.
default5.4 
defaultA team oriented approach should be encouraged in order to eliminate aggressive competition amongst research staff.
default5.5 
defaultGood mentoring through the PhD (in addition t
defaulto academic supervision) would be a key way to improve retention of women, as whether an individual has a mentor dictates likelihood of success in science
default.
default 
defaultThis helps su
defaultpport young women in the field and helps to give incentive to their own research. One ma
defaultjor incentive is for people to understand the job prospects in their chosen field, and having good mentoring is very important in this.
default5.6 
defaultProvision of cost-effective childcare for PhD students and scientists, as well as enforcing provision of flexible wo
defaultrking. Currently it seems to be that a student or early scientist’s working arrangements are dictated mostly by their direct supervisor. If a supervisor is not understanding with regards to the extra commitments that family brings, this may well discourage
default w
defaultomen from staying in the field.
default 
default&#xa0;
default6. What role should the Government have in encouraging the retention of women in academic STEM careers?
default6.1 
defaultSpecific events to attract women into the governmental research sectors can help, where women can talk and netwo
defaultrk with other women (and men) to gain insight into working in government STEM departments. 
default6.2 
defaultProvision of facilities for cost-effective childcare and flexible working are key to enabling women to co-manage a career with family commitments. Government can play a role in helping to change attitudes towards those who have family commitments, as lack 
defaultof understanding helps force out women from the sector. 
default6.3 
defaultTo boost women numbers into the sector initially, financial incentives to have certain percentages of women at each level could be offered to STEM sectors that perform poorly currently
default6.4 
defaultMen
default ha
defaultve no idea about the type of prejudice and difficulties women in STEM
default (and other industries) face. O
defaultften men just don’t know about the issues women face having never experienced them
default and awareness raising is crucial.
default6.5 
defaultPromote more women into positions o
defaultf power and responsibility.  Seeing role models encourages women to actively advance their own careers
default. C
defaultompulsory targets of the percentage of women in senior management and on Boards (e.g. 40%)
default should be set and there needs to be recognition
default and reward 
defaulto
defaultf 
defaultwomen in successful STEM careers, e.g. Honours List
default6.6 
defaultTrain science &amp; technology teachers (especially male teachers) in high schools to be consciously gender-equal in lessons, in the way opportunities are given for girls to give oral answers to whole-c
defaultlass questions and in opportunities for girls to lead in practical sessions
default6.7 
defaultLegislation is required to ensure that women taking time out of work for child-bearing have their careers protected – we should not see childbirth as detrimental to a woman’s c
defaultareer but be thankful 
defaultthat well-educated women are willing to pursue motherhood in a society that tends to deride their choices.
default6.8 
defaultFree, universal childcare should be reinstated.
default6.9 
defaultIn recruitment, where many male applicants are received and few women 
defaultper vacancy, there should be a legal obligation on the employer to offer appropriate support (such as additional training) that would bring a female candidate to the required level of competence, in order to avoid female candidates dropping out of the proc
defaultess where levels of experience resulting from career breaks for family reasons look reduced in comparison with male applicants. Similarly, women who reach the shortlist for a vacancy should be entitled to a trial period in the role, rather than ejected on 
defaultthe grounds that experience is reduced in comparison to male applicants.
default6.10 
defaultRetention of women in STEM careers, both academic and industrial, will fall as a result of increased university fees at BSc level.  Women may not see a return on their investment in university education if they choose to pursue a career in academic STEM an
defaultd a family, or re-enter academic STEM after a period in industry or the public sector. A reduction in fees, or a bonus/tax break in future for women who return to STEM careers, should therefore be considered as a form of repatriation for women entering STE
defaultM and taking on this amount risk. 
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default