&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the RMT Union (TIC 09default1default)defaultIntroductiondefaultThe National Union of Rail, Maritime &amp; Transport Workers welcomes the opportunity to respond to the TRANSCOM request for written evidence on
default passenger transport in isolated communities.
defaultRMT is the largest of the UK rail unions, representing over 80,000 members, 
defaultacross all sectors of the transport industry
default. 
defaultExecutive summarydefault&#xa0;default1.1default 
defaultRMT believes that the provision of transport services in isolated communities is necessary for 
defaulte
defaultnsuring both socia
defaultl inclusion and economic growth and that 
defaultValue for Money must include the cost and benefits to society as a whole.  Britain’s public transport
default network has clearly defined economic, social and environmental objectives which cannot be viewed in isolation.
default1.2default 
defaultRMT believes that isolated communities would be best served within an integrated, publically owned and publically run transport network. 
defaultOver the course of this document RMT will highlight the current threats posed by government policy to passengers from isolated communities, using example
defaults
default from the
default maritime, bus
default and rail industries.
default2.1default 
defaultIn terms o
defaultf maritime transport in isolated communities, lifeline ferry services are the most appropriate example to use, in particular in relation to Scotland which, as 
defaultan island nation
default,
default is heavily dependent on the shipping industry, as indeed is the whole of the UK
default. 
defaultL
defaultifeline ferry services to the Northern Isles (Orkney and Shetland) and the numerous island communities living off the west coast of Scotland are an especially important passenger transport link for these isolated communities. 
default2.2default 
defaultThe provision and 
defaultpreservation of publicly owned and run Scottish ferry services has long been a campaigning issue for the RMT and predecessor union the National Union of Seamen. Despite the Scottish Government’s decision to 
defaultprivatise
default ferry services to the Northern Isles by
default awarding the 2012-18 contract to Serco, RMT remain hopeful that the larger contract for ferry services to islands of the west coast (Clyde and Hebrides Ferry Services – CHFS) will stay in the public sector under Caledonian 
defaultMacBrayne
default when the 2016-22 contr
defaultact is awarded.
default2.3default 
defaultIndeed, EU legislation covering the procurement of state 
defaultsubsidised
default public services, under which Scottish ferry services are required to be re-tendered 
defaultmi
defaultlitates
default against the interests of the isolated communities that depend upon these v
defaultessels for contact with the mainland. 
defaultT
defaulthis requirement not only 
defaultdestabilises
default a lifeline public transport service but inherently 
defaultfavours
default the 
defaultprivate shipping industry which can afford to re-submit bids every 6 years whereas incumbent public sector operators
default face a number of political and economic problems when bidding to continue running these services every 6 years.
default2.4default 
defaultThis is a devolved issue, given that Transport Scotland and the Scottish Government awards the contracts for Scottish ferry services but we
default believe the Transport Select Committee should include the passenger transport needs of isolated island communities in Scotland in their deliberations. 
default3.1default 
defaultRMT, with a large number of other concerned organisat
defaulti
defaultons, wro
defaultte to the Chancellor on 30 May 2013 to outline our opposition to future cuts to bus services.  This letter 
defaultis attached.  It outlines th
defaulte
default fact 
defaultthat 
default“
defaulti
defaultn terms of transport and social inclusion, b
defaultuses offer great value for public money. Nearly 5 billion bus trips are made each year and bus commuters help generate over £64 billion of economic output. Every £1 of public investment in buses provides between £3 and £5 of wider benefits to local economi
defaultes 
defaultas well as
default social and environmental well
default-being. This is a 
defaultreturn that is higher than for many transport infrastructure schemes. 
default&#xa0;
default3.2default 
default“
defaultBuses are essential for the quarter of UK households without a car. Over half of households on the lowest incomes fall
default into this category and bus use rises as income falls. Young people need reliable and affordable bus services in order to take up opportunities in education and employment, whilst providing a vital lifeline to access public services. For disabled people, a
defaultccessible public transport is crucial in keeping people connected to the communities that their disability can often cut them off from. For people in rural areas, buses are often essential not just for work and education, but for independence. Buses are al
defaultso important for leisure use, helping people gain access to and travel around the countryside more sustainably; they often also contribute to the overall visitor experience. 
default&#xa0;
default3.3default 
default“
defaultThe cuts to bus funding stand
default in stark contrast to Government commitments t
defaulto restore the economy and get people working. Evidence shows that many people who want to work are unable to take jobs, or are forced on to benefits, because of insufficient and expensive bus provision. A third of jobseekers say poor transport options are 
defaultthe biggest barrier to finding work. Local businesses depend on customers getting to the shops and services on the bus. High streets up and 
defaultdown the country will be damaged if bus services are cut, causing
default 
defaultunemployment and holding back economic recovery. R
defaultedundancies in the bus industry, and the associated negative social and economic impacts, will also be felt as a result of bus cuts. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4default 
defaultBus services are essential to the objectives of a number of government departments. Spending on buses benefits Depart
defaultment of Work and Pensions, through reducin
defaultg welfare spending by providing
default jobseekers with access to employment, the Dep
defaultartment of Health, through long-
defaultterm independence, access to healthcare
default and the shift away from car use to other forms of transport such 
defaultas walking that promote physical activity, the Department for Education through providing access to schools and colleges and of course transport and the wider economy. Because of this, we are calling on the Government to recognise the cross
default‐
defaultdepartmental benefits of bus spending and 
defaultreinstate
default support for BSOG and local authority grants via funding pooled from across relevant departments. This innovative solution would protect bus services and keep the wheels of the economy moving
default”
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.5default 
defaultFollo
defaultwing the cuts over 
defaultrecent
default years to the bus service operators grant (the only funding local bus services receive) l
defaultocal authority supported services declined by 10% in non-metropolit
defaultan areas
default. Evidence from our surveys of bus services suggests that commercia
defaultl services are now also under severe pressure as the 
defaultcut in the 
defaultBSOG 
defaultand local authority funding comes in.
default 
default4.1default 
defaultThe UK’s privatised railway is failing society, the economy and the environment, whilst draining taxpayer
defaults’ money into the pockets of private shareholders. Common sense and expert railway knowledge have ceded to a misguided private-must-be
default-
defaultbest ethos, leaving Britain with a fragmented dysfunctional railway system that other countries view with disbelief.
default&#xa0;
default4.2default 
defaultExcessive costs in the UK rail industry have recently been highlighted by the McNulty Review. This study criticised waste from fragmentation and complexity in our railways, but ignored the obvious solution: simplify the system. Instead, the Review propose
defaults more fragmentation. Analysts have predicted the McNulty approach would lead to older trains, higher fares, 
defaultand 
defaultfewer ser
defaultvices off-peak and at weekends. This would obviously lead to 
defaultfewer 
defaultand lower quality 
defaultservices to isolated 
defaultcommunities. Large sums of m
defaultoney would still be lost to inefficiencies 
defaultcaused by
default complex contractual agreements between dozens of companies.
default&#xa0;
default4.3default 
defaultThe costs associated with fragmentation and leakage of public money out of the railway translate into social costs. A portion of the publi
defaultc monies allocated for investment to increase the railway’s capacity and to improve services has instead been diverted to provide private profit. That money could have been spent on
default rebuilding and 
defaultstaffing 
defaultrun-down stations, and re-opening missing links to
default make the railway work better
default for isolated 
defaultcommunities. 
default&#xa0;
default4.4default 
defaultLeakage of money out of the privatised railway system has also reduced the amount that can be invested in rail improvements to stimulate economic activity and regeneration. This represents a 
defaultlost opportunity. For example, there is evidence that towns that lack good transport links to their nearest main city are falling behind economically: research by the Centre for Cities showed that poor train services were resulting in a widening ‘wealth ga
defaultp’ between such towns as Burnley and Blackburn and Manchester
default. There are sizeable towns lacking rail links which could benefit
default 
defaultfrom reopening rail lines and stations to attract economic investment and offer residents access to more work opportunities
default.
default 
defaultAc
defaultcording to the 2010, national rail transport survey, commuting accounts for 63 % of all rail journeys.
default 
defaultOpen Access
default4.5default 
defaultRecent political discourse, accompanied by an Office of Rail Regulation consultation, has called for an increase in open access operations which the RMT believes would have a devastating impact on the 
defaultrail network as a whole, but in particular by increasin
defaultg fragmentation and severely disadvantaging isolated communities. As such, 
defaultRMT is totally opposed to any increase in open access operations
default.
default4.6default 
defaultRMT is concerned that the government’s intention to increase these kind of operations will see the systematic d
defaultrain
defaulting
default of public money from the rail network increase as operators choose only to operate services on a commercial basis, with no rega
defaultrd to socially necessary routes serving isolated communities.
default4.7default 
defaultIn the past we have witnessed the withdrawal of open ac
defaultcess operations when the ownership of a franchise holding train operating company has changed, such as in the case of the 
defaultWrexham
default and 
defaultShropshire
default Railway.
default4.8default 
defaultFurthermore, 
defaultRMT has noted the registration of open access companies on lines such as the East Coa
defaultst mainline by operators who are also bidding for the franchise, clearly demonstrating that both the franchising and open access systems are open to abuse. 
default4.9default 
defaultOpen access operations are even 
defaultmore
default 
defaultun
defaultstable than the current franchising system with no oblig
defaultation being placed on the operator to provide any services above the bare minimum commercial services. Not only does this lead to a neglect of the sections of the railway connecting towns and villages to larger cities, but it can also lead to overcrowding 
defaulton intercity routes.
defaultDual focus franchises
default4.10default 
defaultIsolated communities have faced a further threat from a concept known as a dual-focus franchise.
default4.11default 
defaultThis type of franchise model is divi
defaultding the franchised routes in
defaultt
defaulto 
defaulttwo separate railways - 
defaultone economically viable and one socially necessary. 
default4.12default 
defaultRMT 
defaulthas noted proposals in re-franchising consultation papers which 
defaultwould increase
default the fragmentation and the complexity of the railway. 
default4.13default 
defaultFor example, t
defaulthe proposal to subdivide the Scottish rail
default network in terms of routes, fares, what is economically viable (profitable) and what is socially necessary (not profitable) in addition to creating entirely separate franchises for services such as the Caledonian Sleeper Services will be dis
defaultastrous for Sc
defaultotland’s railway, and in particular for isolated communities.
default4.14default 
defaultEssentially
default the dual focus concept 
defaultmeans shifting most of the responsibility for the socially necessary routes from the train operator onto the taxpayer and passenger, leaving the franchise
defaulte with the most profitable routes to exploit.
defaultStaff and accessibility
default4.15default 
defaultWe have attached the additional evidence submitted to the Transport Committee by the RMT, TUC, ASLEF, TSSA and Unite which outlines the threat to jobs on the railway by the McNulty 
defaultValue for Money study and also the impact of such cuts on passenger services, safety and accessibility.
default4.16default 
defaultRMT believes that cutting staffing levels will create heightened problems on passenger services, safety and accessibility in isolated communities
default. 
defaultThe problems of areas with poor transport links will be compounded if passengers are deterred from  using the railways due to safety fears over 
defaultdestaffed
default trains, ticket offices and stations and concerns that they will  not be able to 
defaultreceive
default accurate trave
defaultl advice and be able to purchase the best value ticket. 
default 
default4.17default 
defaultIndeed the 
defaultgovernment
default policy of 
defaultreducing hours or closing ticket offices in Category D &amp; E 
default(smaller) 
defaultstations, reducing platform staff and reducing on-train staff
default can be seen as 
defaultdirectly
default discriminating against more isolated communities
default4.18 defaultIt has been brought to the attention of RMT that First Great Western are now offering different ticket types, at different prices, on their website as from their ticket offices. RMT believes that this 
defaultis a deliberate attempt to undermine the important role of ticket offices and that it will have a significant impact on passengers in isolated communities who may, in some instances, rely exclusively on their  local ticket office for transport information.
default It sets a dangerous precedent for the entire industry, and RMT urges the Transport Committee to oppose this practice before it before endemic.
default defaultRail devolution
default4.18default 
defaultRMT notes that rail devolution/decentralisation has been proposed as a means of tacking tr
defaultansport issues in isolated 
defaultcommunities
default.
default4.19default 
defaultRMT welcomes the introduction of local democratic control where the intention is to genuinely increase democratic control of the network. It is on this basis that RMT campaigns for the railway to run in the 
defaultinterests of the travelling public as opposed to the interests of private profit. RMT believes that any increase in local democratic control must be appropriately resourced for it to be effective, and must be accompanied by national democratic control.
defaultRMT
default is concerned that devolution may be used as means in which to impose large scale cuts to staff and services, at arm’s length from central government in order to distract from the wider government agenda of imposing permanent austerity on Britain’s railway
default.
default The lessons of devolution 
defaultin the bus industry is that local authorities have either been forced to make cuts to bus services to enable the continuation of other public services or in a number of instances 
defaultauthorities
default have made unenforced 
defaultdecisions
default to buses in favour of road 
defaultdevelopment
default for cars.
defaultCurrent government policy of 
defaultforcing through staffing cuts and 
defaultprioritising the interest of the private sector over that of communities will deepen the transport isolation of many communities
default. Pr
defaultoposals around devolving transport powers, rather than helping these communities could herald a new wave of cuts in public transport that will disproportionately impact on 
default 
defaultgroups that already suffer isolation within communities such as the elderly, unempl
defaultoyed and disabled. 
defaultThe Union would be available to discuss these issues through oral evidence to the Committee 
defaultSeptember 2013
default1
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultCentre for Cities (2008) 
defaultCity links: integration and isolation; 
defaultalso The Guardian 18 March 2008 
defaultPoor transport links
defaulthit wealth of outlying northern towns
default 
defaulthttp://www.bettertransport.org.uk/campaigns/public_transport/rail/lines_that_should_reopen/top_36
default, accessed 9
defaultSeptember 2011, includes a list of the ‘top 36’ lines that should re-open.
default