&#xa0;
defaultWritten submission from Halton Borough Council (LPG 26)default&#xa0;
defaultPurpose of the Report
default:
defaultHalton Borough Council wishes to submit
default evidence to the Select Committee in relation to the inquiry into 
defaultLocal Government
default Procurement. This evidence outlines 
defaultour procurement journey, demonstrates our best practice and how we have secured 
defaultvalue for money through 
defaultour 
defaultcommercial procurement
default concept. We have developed this in-house and are now working with a number of public sector partners to align their processes, practices and rules to ours in order to share our concept and replicate our success delivering further efficiencies and savings in other organisations.
defaultExecutive Summary
default:
defaultOpportunities for Consideration:
defaultOverview of Halton’s Commercial Procurement Concept
default:
defaultHalton Borough Council has placed Commercial Procurement at the heart of its business since April 2010. It continues to be one of the Council’s key solutions to avoid reductions to frontline services and protecting the vulnerable. It will remain to be at the centre of our organisation as we look to balance budgets year on year.
defaultHalton benefits from strong leadership and a clear direction of support from Executive Board and Chief Officers as well as a dynamic vision from their Head of Procurement who has orchestrated her ideas into reality leading whole organisational change through improved strategic procurement. This has delivered significant cashable and non-cashable savings leading to 
defaultimproved 
defaultservice excellence.
default   
defaultFrom 
defaultApril 2010 a
default commercial approach to procurement was diagnosed, designed and then implemented across the whole organisation. This commenced with a review of spend, structures, processes and resources as a ‘health check’ guiding us on ‘quick wins’ but leading to a whole organisational change management programme, from education, communication &amp; training, ‘rules’ review and challenge in order to deliver significant outcomes. The application of commercial procurement has allowed us to take a stepped approach to change and has delivered a best practice concept that could be modelled into any organisation. 
defaultThis concept has been underpinned 
defaultby Six Key Building Blocks: defaultHalton recognised that procurement is a strategic function and is committed to placing it at the centre of its activities. This work stream was successful from:
default&#xa0;
defaultHalton has
default embraced the importance of robust governance and work practices to support a commercial approach to procurement making this a key strategic function. Procurement Standing Orders review was paramount to our success as this set down new work parameters in order to secure better ‘gate-keeping’ which include:
default&#xa0;
defaultHaving full visibility of spend has influenced our approach to procurement leading to the delivery of savings and achieving cost avoidance.
default defaultWe have converted thinking from ‘what we want’ to ‘what we actually need’; which directly influences demand and consumption to reduce costs significantly. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis is a proven way of working with key suppliers and is used in other public sector organisations to review overall business relationships, contractual arrangements, specifications, rates and expected outputs in order to mutually agree benefits which will result in savings for the Council as the customer. It will deliver greater value, meet strategic objectives and add social value. This will have greater leverage if we work with partners. In support of SRM:
default&#xa0;
defaultHalton has adopted a category management approach to procurement by aligning business requirements across the 
defaultorganisation
default. By working with wider partners we 
defaultare starting to
default gain greater leverage, add
defaulted
default value and maximis
defaulting more
default savings. As Halton is relatively small in terms of spend and leverage, 
defaultwe
default can capture
default all
default internal aggregation to drive a category approach to procurement 
defaultbut would significantly gain if partners worked in a more aligned way.
default&#xa0;
defaultHalton has developed internal automated process relationships between procurement and accounts payable into a seamless end-to-end process in order to improve efficiencies using e-procurement solutions. This is underpinned by:
defaultResponse to the specific topics:
default&#xa0;
default1. To what extent is local government procurement organised to deliver value for money and social, economic and environmental objectives, including stimulating the local economy? To what extent are local authorities defaultachieving the involvement of local residents in delivering value for money? To what extent are local authorities able to develop long-term relationships with contractors?default&#xa0;
defaultFirstly, Value for Money is secured from our commercial procurement concept as we aspire to publish all trading opportunities 
defaultfor spend from £1,000 upwards via T
defaulthe Chest in order that our practices are fully transparent. This enables market testing all spending decisions, this practice is designed to be proportionate to both risk and value and it allows opport
defaultunity to suppliers 
defaultto tender or quote which supports the stimulation and growth of the local and SME economy.
default 
defaultOur spend 
defaultin 
default2012/13 demonstrated that 89% was with SMEs. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are continually improving our approach to s
defaultocial value and not just when 
defaultconsider
defaulting 
defaultthe evaluation criterion which
default needs to be
default bespoke and proportionate
default but in order that it
default allows us to measure social value gains 
defaultas well as seek
default best value in terms of both quality and price. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe social value gain needs to be embedded into the contract 
defaultthrough voluntary or mandatory 
defaultclauses in order to ensure this value is captured contractually and not just rhetoric 
defaultin the bidder’s
default submissions. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are developing a social value policy and
default a
default set of principles to be embedded into procurement where appropriate to ensure we firstly engage at the pre-procurement stage with potential bidders in order to educate and support as well as allowing bidders
default to attend and contribute to
default an open forum to help us design service delivery to best deliver the outcomes
default required
default. 
defaultWe have strengthened
default 
defaultthe contract 
defaultmanagement function
default to ensure it
default is more commercial in terms of ensuring that performance indicators are measured and challenged when not being achieved. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHalton is one of the four localities in England to take part in the Delivering Social Value in Health Programme. The programme aims to support the implementation of the Public Services (Social Value) Act 2012 locally. Halton will develop best practice of how social value can be gained particularly through health and wellbeing through procurement. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe commenced a campaign during 2010 
defaultfor businesses 
defaultwhich has continued to date in terms
default of promoting our ‘New Ways of T
defaultrading’. This was underpinned by a series of business workshops which educated and supported the business community 
defaultin local government procurement;
default registering and using 
defaultT
defaulthe Chest
default;
default as well as demonstrating our commitment in Halton to ensure transparency of opportunity and to make the process simple and clear. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur process is risk based rather than value unlike the EU
default financial
default thresholds. This has enabled us to challenge and review our processes and practices
default and
default to address what was termed as a bureaucratic and onerous historically in Halton by our business community.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe have clear performance indicators which are being embedded into our large
defaultr
default contracts which take account of the 
defaulthow the main contractor can contribute to Employment, Learning and Skills growth in Halton. We also measure this through the 
defaulttransparency of opportunity for smaller contractors
default as part of their supply chain.
default This was
default applied and
default tested in contracts such as Building Schools for the Future (£60M) and Highways joint contract across Hal
defaultton and Warrington Councils (£70-100
defaultM
default over 10 years
default). This contractor has also relocated into the Borough.  Similar KPIs are being developed at present into Mersey Gateway Bridge contract (£600M). 
default&#xa0;
default2. Do authorities take sufficient advantage of collaborative and joint procurement opportunities, including those available from central government? In addition, the Committee would welcome information on PFI contracts and their operation with local government.default&#xa0;
defaultLocal Government does not take advantage enough of collaborative and joint procurement opportunities. Our perception of the barriers to this are; different rules in each organisation; the timings of contract end dates and the lack of motivation for one or more partner to extend their contract in order to align timings; lack of regional leadership and coordination; no mandate to drive collaboration jus
defaultt enthusiasm of the willing few
default;
default and the perceived
default threat of a ‘shared service’ if we procure together.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe solution could be; aligning rules and p
defaultrocesses; developing a partnership 
defaultapproach to contract management i.e. one contract register which could be facilitated 
defaultthrough an e-solution and sharing
default spend data in order that we have joint planning and i
defaultdentify aggregate opportunities. All of this
default requires strong commitment and clear 
defaultcross-partner
default leadership to allow all of these opportunities to be explored and then implemented. We should approach procurement as ‘one buyer’.
default This doesn’t have to be a regional approach just a collaborative approach where more than one public sector partner works together.
default&#xa0;
defaultCentral government opportunities as well as other 
defaultcentral purchasing bodies
default are mostly explored as part of our pre-procurement activi
defaultty in Halton to ensure we bench
defaultmark in order to seek the best route to market.
defaultIn Halton we do have a PFI contract as part of BSF. We have an established LEP which is considered as part of the pre procurement process for 
defaultconstruction spend and is bench
defaultmarked accordingly as this is a pre-procured route so can offer some value for money.
default This is a Joint Venture Company where Halton BC is a 10% shareholder.
default&#xa0;
default3. How can local authorities access the skills, expertise and capabilities to implement effective procurement strategies, including value for money and social and economic objectives? More specifically, does local government have sufficient understanding of its procurement expenditure and the markets for goods and services to deliver quality procurement strategies—locally and regionally. If not, how can deficiencies be addressed?default&#xa0;
defaultLocal 
defaultauthorities need to utilise Halton’s Commercial Procurement concept
default,
default which is
default designed, tested and implemented 
defaultand is now being embraced by a few public sector partners. Halton has invested in the procurement to grow the
default skills
default and
default capabilities
default which has been underpinned by a 
defaultclear strategy
default and strong leadership and expertise
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultOther Local Authorities 
defaultcould 
defaultconsider 
defaultsharing leadership in order to drive organisational change through procurement. This concept is currently being tested by Sefton MBC wh
defaulto
default have signed up to aligning their procurement rules, processes and practices to Halton’s and Halton is providing 
defaultdirect 
defaultleadership,
default training and support. Halton
default are also delivering a pilot to Halton Clinical
default Commissioning Group with the intention of 
defaultsecuring a contract from 2014 to deliver a procurement service. This is the
default start of driving wider partner 
defaultintegration
default through procurement
default.
default Halton aspires to develop such
default relationships with other public sector partners
default as the demand is rapidly growing
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is a distinct lack of robust strategic procurement leadership within the public sector which may be as a result of not recruiting the right skill base or not valuing the skill that the right person will bring to lead whole organisational change? Funding pressures may be a barrier particularly in the public sector not recognising the opportunity of transforming services through procurement therefore not investing in this work stream and resourcing this concept.
default&#xa0;
defaultIf we were to look overseas for example
default;
default New Zealand, there is a coordinated approach
default ‘Government Procurement Reform)
default led from central government to support local government
default and schools
default in procurement improvement. We need to establish a 
defaultnational approach, developing more formal cross partner support to 
defaultchallenge local 
defaultgovernment 
defaultprocurement
default and
default offer support, direction and solutions to be tailored at a local level.
default&#xa0;
defaultProcurement sits in every organisation as we all buy, therefore standardised rules, processes,
default and procedures
default, should be encouraged as part of a national campaign. Our work reaches across public health and clinical commissioning groups as well as wider public sector partners. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur commercial procurement concept focusses on Demand Management and
default S
defaultupplier 
defaultR
defaultelationship 
defaultM
defaultanagement which
default underpin how we approach
default our strategy to procurement as
default Halton BC knows 
defaultits procurement expenditure and its markets and uses this to drive procurement priorities and opportunities. 
default&#xa0;
default4. To what extent is risk in local government procurement and contracting understood and managed and contracting strategies adopted, which are tailored to product and supplier market places? More specifically, do local authorities maintain and operate effective client management functions and have they entered contractual arrangements which allow the flexibility to meet changing circumstances such as budget reductions or changes in the way a service has to be delivered?default&#xa0;
defaultHalton underpins all procurement 
defaultactivity with a
default risk assessment 
defaultprocess (Risk Based Sourcing - RBS) for all spend below EU financial thresholds and this replaces the PQQ. 
defaultUnderstanding of risk is paramount and this sits at the start
default of the pre-procurement process as we focus on risk not value below EU.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs part of this pre-procurement risk assessment 
defaultprocess 
defaultofficers explore risk in e
defaultvery respect in order that 
defaultrisk
defaults are
default identified 
defaultand then
default 
defaultremoved, reduced or managed 
defaultthroughout
default the procurement process and
default the life of the 
defaultcontract.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe do operate an effective client management function as we manage our procurement on a category basis and this links to contract management which sits with the client department but we maintain a commercial contract management function centrally and contract register.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe do build in at the pre-procurement stage as part of the risk assessment process a step to secure funding availability and approval in order to identify any risk; we work closely with our finance department. This allows us to build in to both the procurement process and contract management process lean procurement principles in order to respond to change.
default&#xa0;
defaultContract management needs to be more focussed on commercial challenge
default. W
defaulte are developing a strategic approach to this by undertaking a 
default‘
defaultroot and branch
default’
default approach to review
defaulting
default contracts
default; this is one of our six building blocks – Supplier Relationship Management
default. This process will be seen as an audit of
default each
default contract and its commercial outputs, 
defaultensures compliance a
defaultnd will allow
default the chance to challenge non-compliance and to understand how the contract can be used flexibly to adapt to changing requirements. The learning from this will allow us to greatly develop ever more flexible clauses so we can respond to pressures and external influences as they arise in a changing public sector canvass. This contract review will also highlight financial efficiencies and improvements that can be sought from
default this
default review and challenge
default process
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are other 
default‘
defaultvehicles
default’
default which allow a more flexible approach to procurement such as Dynamic Purchasing Systems (DPS) which allow a procurement process to remain ‘open’ in order to encourage the 
default‘
defaultbest of breed
default’ into the supplier market at any stage and 
defaultallow
defaults
default flexibility
default as to 
defaulthow we select these pre-procured providers to deliver services. 
defaultWe are exploring such options.
default&#xa0;
default5. How is regularity and propriety of procurement secured and are the arrangements for detecting and addressing impropriety and fraud effective?default&#xa0;
defaultRegularity and propriety of procurement is secured in Halton as we utilise an e
default-tendering portal
default called The Chest which maintains a full audit trail of procurement activity. We have robust procurement rules and control procurement centrally to drive compliance. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur Executive Board play a full part in procurement in terms of our rules requiring decisions to be made at Board level such as spend approval over £1M
default before commencement of procurement
default and waiver requests where our rules cannot be followed.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur Business Efficiency Board undertake a scrutiny role, they select a number of procurement exercises to ‘test’
default annually
default in order to evaluate the end to end process and to make recommendations
default to E
defaultxecutive
default Board
default in terms of the rules. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur intern
defaultal audit team have scrutinised T
defaulthe Chest system and processes as well as select annually a number of procurement exercise
defaults
default to audit, more so
default,
default those of material value.
default The Audit Commission also reviewed our new ways of working and the use of The Chest and commended this as “Much strengthened procurement and significantly improved procurement arrangements as a key mechanism for delivering the efficiency programme across the Council” (Annual governance report 2010/11). 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur central role is guidance, support and advice as well as challenge and moderation. In Halton we do adopt a ‘team around the table’ approach in order to bring the service specialist
defaults
default together with the procurement specialists. All of our processes are standard
defaultised
default and we have fully implemented our risk based approach, standard documentation
default and a web based process which are used before we use T
defaulthe Chest to facilitate the actual procurement exercise.
default&#xa0;
default6. Is local authority procurement fully transparent, audited effectively and does it provide appropriate mechanisms for redress? Specifically, are the arrangements for securing the accountability of procured services and goods to local authorities and local residents adequate and effective? More specifically, to what extent are local authorities able to provide assurance to central government that value for money (in the broadest sense of the term) is delivered?default&#xa0;
defaultOur l
defaultocal authority procurement is fully transparent but this isn’t the case in many public sector organisations. This is demonstrated as all procurement 
defaultabove £1,000 is processed via T
defaulthe Chest.
default&#xa0;
defaultMechanisms for redress: The Remedies D
defaultirective is there for EU value procurement. 
defaultFor spend b
defaultelow EU
default 
defaultwe take complaints and challenges very seriously. W
defaulte have a complaints procedure b
defaultut we do adopt the principles of transparency in terms of feedback by providing a rank position for all bidders 
defaultfor procurement activity 
defaultbelow EU. If additional feedback is requested we wi
defaultll respond
default. EU 
defaultprinciples are 
defaultadopted for all pro
defaultcurement
default activity.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe whole concept we have designed, tested and embedded demonstrates how we can assure central government that we deliver value for money. This is underpinned by a clear and measurable strategy and our simple Procurement Standing Orders.
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusion:
default&#xa0;
defaultWe recognise in Halton that we have made significant progress in securing a commercial procurement concept which is fully embedded into the organisation. We commend this concept and approach to all public sector organisations as it clearly demonstrates value for money, reduces risk significantly, removes bureaucracy and benefits the supply market as well as the public sector. 
defaultWe recognise that public sector organisations have different priorities and demands and there are significant variations in performance which means there is greater scope for improvement. Some procurement practices are too ‘traditional’, under resourced and lack procurement vision and leadership. But we all face the same pressures economically, socially and environmentally and we all spend public money therefore, we all must be accountable and we all must secure value for money which is clearly demonstrable from the suc
defaultcess in Halton. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default