Written evidence submitted by the Community Law Partnership (LAI 005)defaultIntroduction defaultAt the outset of this submission we should say that this was drafted prior to the Ministry of Justice publishing the further consultation paper defaultJudicial Review: Proposals for Further Reformdefault. We may ,therefore, be making a supplementary submission to the JCdefaultHR once we have fully assessed this latest paper.defaultThe Community Law Partnership (CLP) is a radical, progressive firm of solicitors specialising in the law relat
defaulting to Housing and Public Law
default.  CLP incorporates the Travellers Advice Team (TAT), a ground-bre
defaultaking nationwide, 24 hour advice service for Gypsies and Travellers. 
defaultIn the Ministerial Foreword,
default to the Ministry of Justice Consultation Paper, 
defaultT
defaultransforming Legal Aid :  Delivering a More Credible and Efficient System 
default(TLA),
default 
defaultChris Grayling states:-
defaultTax
defaultpayer
defaults
default’
default money has been used to pay for frivolous claims, to foot the legal bills of wealthy criminals, and to cover cases which run on and on racking up large fees for a small number of lawyers, far in excess of what senior public servants are paid.  
defaultThi
defaults quote reveals an issue which 
defaultruns through the whole of TLA, namely a complete lack of sophisticated
default,
default statistical analysis of the various areas covered.  Where, for example, is the analy
defaultsis of “frivolous claims”?
default  Who are the “wealthy criminals” and how will the proposals prevent t
defaultheir legal bills being “footed”?
default  What are the cases which run on and on and who are the lawyers who are paid large sums of money?  
defaultTLA states that
default:
default “
defaultT
defaulthe cost to the system spiralled o
defaultut of control and it became one of 
defaultthe most costly in the world”. 
defaultAs the UK’s most Senior Judge, Lord Neuberger, the President of the Supreme Court, stated in May 2013:- “[W]
defaulthile
default it is true that Legal Aid is higher per capita in the UK than in almost all o
defaultther countries in Europe, our Judicial and Court costs are much lower per capita”.  
defaultAnother example
default of the lack of sophisticated, statistical analysis 
defaultis at Chapter 2 (Introduction) where it is stated at 
defaultpara
default 2.1:-
default.........[L
defaultegal] aid appears to have been provided for cases that do not justify it and to those who do not need it, which undermines public confidence in the scheme.  
default&#xa0;
defaultOnce again where is the evidence and what are those cases?
default  Speaking for ourselves, we do not run
default cases that do not justify it nor are we interested in wasting our time in doing so.  We do not provide assistance to people w
defaultho do not need it but 
defaultto people who are desperately in need of it.
defaultThis
default response
default concentrate
defaults
default on those areas that we are experts 
defaultin and that we have experience of.  Obviously we join with our colleagues in other areas of law, including criminal law, who are, effectively, under unjustified attack by the current Government.  
defaultPaying for permission work in Judicial Review casesdefault – an adefaultttack on the Rule of Lawdefault 
defaultA large percentage of the Gypsy and Traveller population who live in caravans have to resort to unauthorised encampments due to the lack of adequate sites. If they are faced with a threat of eviction by a local or public authorit
defaulty where the authority concerned are acting unlawfully (e.g. by failing to follow government guidance) then their only recourse is to seek judicial review of the authority concerned.
default The same applies to many other areas of work covered by CLP.
defaultThe first st
defaultage in a judicial review application, once lodged at the court, is that a judge will decide, either on the papers or at an oral hearing, whether the case has sufficient merits and should be given ‘permission’ to proceed to a final hearing. In the consultat
defaultion paper, the government states, with regard to judicial review applications  (at 
defaultpara
default 3.69):
defaultWe propose that providers should only be paid for work carried out on an application for permission (including a request for reconsideration of the application 
defaultat a hearing, the renewal hearing or an onward permission appeal to the Court of Appeal), if permission is granted by the Court.
defaultThis would mean, in a case where the claimant has Legal Aid, that the lawyer (or provider) would have to run the case to a per
defaultmission hearing (if it got that far – see further below) without any guarantee that they would ultimately be paid for the work done. 
defaultJudicial review challenges to local and public authorities are a cornerstone of a democratic society. They allow individu
defaultals to ensure that local and public authorities are prevented from making unlawful decisions or taking unlawful actions. Without such challenges, local and public authorities can act as they please, safe in the knowledge that their actions will not be scru
defaulttinized by the Courts.
defaultMichael Fordham QC has stated:
defaultJudicial review is a central control mechanism of administrative law (public law), by which the judiciary discharge the constitutional responsibility of protecting against abuses of power by public authorities. It constitutes a safeguard which is essential
default to the rule of law: promoting the public interest; policing the 
defaultparameters and duties imposed by Parliament; guiding public authorities and securing that they act lawfully; ensuring that they are accountable to law and not above it; and protecting the rig
defaulthts and interests of those affected by the exercise of public authority power 
default( Judicial Review Handbook, 6
defaultth
default ed., Hart 2012 p5).
defaultIn 
defaultR v Ministry of Defence ex p Smith 
default[1996] QB 517 at 556 D-E, Sir Thomas Bingham MR stated:
default…the court [has] the constituti
defaultonal role and duty of ensuring that the rights of citizens are not abused by the unlawful exercise of executive power.
defaultIn 
defaultR v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex p Fire Brigades Union 
default[1995] 2 AC 513 at 567D-568B, Lord 
defaultMustill
default stated:
defaultTo avoid a
default vacuum in which the citizen would be left without protection against a misuse of executive powers the courts have had no option but to occupy the dead ground…
defaultIn 
defaultRoberts v 
defaultGwyrfai
default DC 
default[1899] 2 Ch 608 at 614, Lindley MR stated:
defaultI know of no duty of the Cou
defaultrt which it is more important to observe, and no power of the Court which it is more important to enforce, than its power of keeping public bodies within their rights.
defaultIn 
defaultR v Inland Revenue Commissioners ex p National Federation of Self-Employed and Small
default Businesses Ltd 
default[1982] AC 617 at 641, Lord 
defaultDiplock
default referred to the 
default“progress towards a comprehensive system of administrative law”
default as 
default“having been the greatest achievement of the English courts in my judicial lifetime.”
defaultAnd now this government intends to 
defaultput judicial review out of reach of everyone apart from the rich. As explained above, the proposal is that Legal Aid providers will not be paid for work done on a judicial review case unless and until permission is granted.  
defaultAt 
defaultpara
default 3.62 of the consultat
defaultion paper the government state that:
defaultWe consider that the appropriate way in which to address this issue is to build into the Civil Legal Aid Scheme a greater incentive for providers to give more careful consideration to the strength of the case before ap
defaultplying for permission for Judicial Review....
defaultWhat is the evidence that Legal Aid providers are not already doing this?  We believe that Legal Aid providers will always give very careful consideration to a matter before they consider lodging a judicial re
defaultview application.
default 
defaultWe would question the evidential basis for this
default defaultassertion
default. defaultThe inference appears to be that practitioners issue judicial review applications frivolously, without having considered the 
defaultpotential merits of such judicial review applications 
defaultand in apparent contempt of well established funding code guidance as to the merits. This inference borders on the offensive. We assert very forcefully  that
default,
default in our experience,  while it cannot always be clear at the outset, practitioners do give proper a
defaultnd careful consideration to the merits of the case, the prospects of success, the remedy sought and the duty to protect the 
defaultL
defaultegal 
defaultA
defaultid 
defaultF
defaultund. It is a balancing act that practitioners are very adept at performing. In addition, there are clear (negative) cost 
defaultimplications of running judicial review applications that have no merit and, as one would expect, such claims are d
defaultealt with very robustly by the 
defaultj
defaultudiciary.
default default 
defaultWhat is the real evidence? The Public Law Project (PLP) have stated:
defaultOn the Today Programme on
default 23 April 2013, the Lord Chancellor was interviewed by John Humphreys about the Government’s plans to implement changes to judicial review procedure. The interview included the following exchange: 
defaultHumphreys: 
default“
defaultWhy are you doing it [making the changes]?
default”
default 
defaultThe Lord Chancellor: 
default“
defaultWell let me give you a raw piece of statistic that will explain the nature of the problem. In 2011, the last year we had figures available, there were 11,359 applications for judicial review. In the end 144 were successful and all of
default the rest of them tied up government lawyers, local authority lawyers in time, in expense for a huge number of cases
default 
defaultof which virtually none were successful. We’re not saying there shouldn’t be judicial
default 
defaultreview, we’re not saying that members of the public a
defaultnd organisations should not be able to challenge public bodies, but what we’re saying is that we have to raise the bar so that we have fewer cases t
defaulthat have no chance of succeeding.
default”
defaultA brief look at the official Ministry of Justice statistics (see table 6
default of the document headed
default 
default“Judicial Review Statistics 2007-2011 – tables”) shows that the Lord Chancellor’s reference to only 144 “successful” cases was misconceived. This is of concern, because it suggests that the Government’s recently announced changes to
default judicial review procedure, and its new proposals for restricting legal aid for judicial review, were based on a misreading of the evidence and/or a misunderstanding of the judicial review process. The Lord Chancellor should, more than anyone, be well awar
defaulte of the constitutional significance of judicial review, as the means by which Government can be held to account by the courts. Restricting access to judicial review – and interfering with the checks and balances of our unwritten constitution – should not 
defaultbe done on the basis of misleading statistics or in an evidential vacuum. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 144 figure relied upon by the Lord Chancellor is false because it only measures the number of judicial review cases that succeeded at a full hearing (as opposed to 212 that fai
defaultled). But PLP’s research suggests that thousands of cases will have settled with a positive outcome for the claimant in 2011: 
default- after the claim was issued but before the permission application was determined 
default- after permission was refused on the papers but before the oral renewal was heard 
default- after permission was granted but before the substantive hearing. 
default…..Research done by PLP and Essex University confirms practitioners’ experience that settled judicial re
defaultview cases are settled favourably to the claimant in a substantial proportion
default defaultof cases
default. 
defaultIt is therefore clear that a substantial proportion of the missing cases and those recorded as withdrawn will have settled on terms favourable to the claimant. 
defaultA care
defaultful analysis of the 
defaultMoJ’s
default own statistics shows 
defaultonly 515 cases out of the initial 4,074 legally aided cases (i
default.
defaulte
default.
default 13%) as having ended at permission without benefit to the client. So as at the end of the permission stage, 87% of the sample of legally aided 
defaultcases relied upon by the Government had either been settled, had ended following the refusal of permission but with substantive benefit recorded to the client, or had been granted permission.
defaultF
defaultor a projection of the number of successful cases in 2011, it 
defaultis worthwhile noting the response to the Lord Chancellor’s statement by PLP’s Research Director, 
defaultVarda
default 
defaultBondy
default, and Professor Maurice 
defaultSunkin
default of the University of Essex 
defaultUnpacking JR Statistics
default, dated 30 April 2013
default:
defaultIn summary, based on the statistics 
defaultavailable for 2011, it can be estimated that claimants will have obtained a benefit (and by implication that their claims had merit) in over 40 per cent of the civil non
default‐
defaultimmigration/asylum claims issued in that year. This percentage presents a very differe
defaultnt image to that portrayed by the Lord Chancellor when in his radio interview on 23 April 2013 he suggested that less than 1.5 per cent of claimants are successful in judicial review proceedings (144 from 11,359 claims issued). This serious difference poin
defaultts to more than simply a different way of interpreting the statistical evidence. It highlights significant limitations in the official statistics especially for those, including those in government, who need reliable figures on how cases proceed through th
defaulte system. It is insufficient to rely on statistics that only show how many decisions are taken by judges but do not actually show how individual cases or cohorts of cases progress. This fundamental limitation means that the official 
defaultstatistics provide at b
defaultest an unreliable evidence base for reform; at worst they are
default 
defaultgrossly misleading. Either way they do not provide a sound basis for reform nor for public
default 
defaultunderstanding of JR.
defaultThe experience at CLP reflects the research carried out by the Public Law P
defaultroject
default. In the majority of our
default cases the local or public authority defendant concedes the matter before the case ever gets to the permission stage. It might be said that, if the local or public authority concede before the permission stage is arrived at, then th
defaulte claimant will be able to obtain his/her costs in any event.  As is effectively accepted within the consultation paper, this is certainly not the case.  Often, in our experience, a local authority will concede and withdraw the relevant decision (albeit th
defaultat it might be suspected that this concession has been made because the original decision was unlawful or completely wrong) without accepting that the claimant’s legal arguments were correct.  In those circumstances it may not be possible to obtain a costs
default award against the local authority.  Alternatively a great deal of further work might be required in making submissions to the court on the question of costs and, once again, that extra work may also prove to be fruitless if the decision is made that costs
default should not be awarded in the claimant’s favour.
defaultThe Travellers Advice Tea
defaultm (TAT) was first set up in 1995 and
default joined CLP when CLP was set up in January 1999.  In the wake of the Criminal Justice and Public Order Act 1994, new draconian powers of eviction
default were introduced against unauthorised Gypsy and Traveller encampments both for local authorities and the Police.  Despite Government Guidance, most local authorities at that time failed to carry out proper welfare enquiries before deciding to evict an enca
defaultmpment and failed to have any proper written policies about this issue.  TAT carried out a large n
defaultumber of judicial r
defaulteview cases over the years concerning these issues.  Jumping ahead to the present day, it is now very rare to come across a local authority
default that does not at least attempt to carry out welfare enquiries and it is equally rare to come across a local authority that does not have some form of written policy about this issue.  This has come about due to local authorities throughout England and Wal
defaultes bein
defaultg held accountable by means of judicial r
defaulteview.  The vast majority of those cases settled very quickly and usually prior to the question of permission having to be dealt with at all.  
defaultCLP’s Travellers Advice Team have carried out an analysis of th
defaulte judicial review cases they have run from the beginning of April 2012 to the end of March 2013. There were 11 cases. Only one of those has so far reached permission stage and permission has been granted. In
default 4 cases, legal aid was granted
default, counsel instruct
defaulted and we were on the verge of lodging the judicial review when the local authority conceded the matter on terms favourable to our clie
defaultnt. Obviously there is no method
default in such cases of getting your costs paid by the other side. In one case the matter was l
defaultodged, interim relief was refused and it was then too late to take the matter any further forward – this was, to date, the only 
defaultunsuccessful case. In one case the matter was lodged and the local authority then conceded on terms favourable to our client. Si
defaultnce this local authority had failed to even respond to our pre-action protocol letter they agreed to pay our costs. Two cases were lodged and then settled on terms favourable to our clients. There was no order for costs but, in both cases, there was a pote
defaultntial
defaultly
default difficult argument about whether the defendant was a public authority or not. Two cases have been lodged and put on hold pending certain matters (and before reaching permission stage). Our prediction at this stage is that both matters look as if th
defaultey may settle favourably for our clients. We cannot guarantee that costs will be paid by the other side
default,
default however. 
defaultSo the tally out of these 11 cases is:
defaultGranted permission
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default1
defaultSuccessful 
default 
defaultand other side to pay costs
default              
default              
default1
defaultSuccessful but no order as to costs
default              
default              
default              
default6
defaultUnsuccessful 
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default1
defaultOn hold
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default              
default2
defaultPutting to one side for the moment the two cases that are on hold, 
default8 out of 9 cases have either been successful or have been granted permissiondefault. However we have only been paid our costs in 1 out of those 9 cases 
default(though under the new proposals we would be guaranteed at least legal aid payment in the one case that has been granted permission). 
defaultSo we ( and counsel) would not be paid anything in 7 out of the 9 cases.defaultPerversely the proposals in this paper will prolo
defaultng cases because:
default 
defaultThere is no demonstration of any understand
defaulting of the
default impact of the availability of judicial r
defaulteview on the administrative performance of public authorities.  The vast majority of JR cases do not even proceed to a certificate as they are settled favourably in their early stages.  But public bodies w
defaultould have no incentive to abide by the principles of public law in relation to poor litigants because they would know that the likelihood of proceedings actually being issued would have become minimal.  This effect of the 
defaultproposal is not considered.  It is
default nonsense to say that individuals would be able to bring such cases without the assistance of a lawyer.
defaultAdditionally, there is a significant failure in the consultation paper to do any proper analysis of the realities of judicial review:
defaultConcern at the additional costs 
defaultto the court service caused by an increased nu
defaultmber of litigants in person has
default recently been expressed by the Court of Appeal. In 
defaultWright v Michael Wright Supplies Ltd 
default[2013] EWCA 
defaultCiv
default 23416, Lord Justice Ward stated, at paragraph 2: 
defaultWhat I find so depressin
defaultg is that the case highlights the difficulties increasingly encountered by the judiciary at all levels when dealing with litigants in person. Two problems in particular are revealed. The first is how to bring order to the chaos which litigants in person in
defaultvariably – and wholly understandably – manage to create in putting forward their claims and defences. Judges should not have to micro-manage cases, coaxing and cajoling the parties to focus on the issues that need to be resolved. Judge Thornton did a brill
defaultiant job in that regard yet, as this case shows, that can be disproportionately time-consuming. 
defaultIt may be saving the Legal Services
default defaultCommission which no longer offers legal aid for this kind of litigation but saving expenditure in one public department in t
defaulthis instance simply increases it in the courts. The expense of three judges of the Court of Appeal dealing with this kind of appeal is enormous. The consequences by way of delay of other appeals which need to be heard are unquantifiable. The appeal would c
defaultertainly never have occurred if the litigants had been represented.
default defaultWith more and more self-represented litigants, this problem is not going to go away. We may have to accept that we live in austere times, but as I come to the end of eighteen years service
default in this court, I shall not refrain from expressing my conviction that justice will be ill served indeed by this emasculation of legal ai
defaultd.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultConclusion defaultIf these proposals are brought in then we believe that Legal Aid providers will no longer be willing to take on  judicial review cases because they will not be able to risk the fact that the case will be run pro bono without any guarantee of payment.  Thisdefault will lead to situations where people are deported to countries where they will face torture or even death, where homeless people will remain on the streets despite the fact that the local authority are in breach of their duties, where people, such as Gypsdefaulties and Travellers, will be evicted despite the fact that the local or public authority are acting unlawfully and where local and public authorities in general will have immunity to act in unlawful ways in the most serious of situations without the individdefaultual concerned having recourse to a realistic method of challenging that decision or that action.  defaultClearly in many of those cases there will be an outright breach of Article 6 of the European Convention. Additionally there are likely to be breaches of mandefaulty other Articles of the Convention if this provision is brought into force.  We suspect thatdefault,default if this provision is brought into forcedefault,default then it would be inevitable that there would be a large number of successful applications to the European Court of Human defaultRights by individuals who were adversely affected by the fact that they had no access to advice and representation when they urgently required it.  default8
default September 2013
default 
defaultwww.publiclawproject.org.uk/documents/UnpackingJRStatistics.pdf
default&#xa0;
default