&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by James Painter (CLC057)default1. The Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism 
default(RISJ) 
defaultis part of the Department of Politics and International Relations at 
defaultthe University of 
defaultOxford.  It was established in 
default2006. The 
defaultRISJ 
defaultaims to serve as 
defaulta
default leading forum for a productive engagement between scholars from a wide range of disciplines and the practitioners of journalism.  It 
defaultaims to 
defaultbring the depth of academic scholarship to major i
defaultssues of relevance to the practice of 
defaultthe 
defaultnews media. 
default2. The 
defaultRISJ
default regularly publishes reports and books on various issues affecting the media.  On the specific issue of climate change, it has published three recent works:  
defaultSummoned by Science: Reporting C
defaultlimate Change at Copenhagen and Beyond
default (2010); 
defaultPoles Apart: the international reporting of climate scepticism 
default(2011); and 
defaultClimate Change in the Media:
default&#xa0;
defaultreporting
default&#xa0;
defaultrisk and uncertainty
default (forthcoming, September 2013).
default&#xa0;
default 
default3. James Painter is the author of the abo
defaultve three publications.  In an individual capacity, he has als
defaulto published extensively on the theme 
defaultof climate change a
defaultnd the media, including a
default recent 
defaultacademic article on the relative presence of climate scepticism in the UK print media compared to the 
defaultmedia in five other countries.
default 
default 
defaultHe also teaches the 
defaultMSc
default module on the media and the environment at the School of Geography, Oxford University.
default4. This submission focuses on the role that the UK media play in portraying climate change, the affect that this 
defaultmay have on public understanding, and recommendations that may help journalists, scientists and government bodies improve the communication of climate science.
default5. The committee asks: defaultWhich voices are trusted in public discourse on climate science and policdefaulty? What role should Government Departments, scientific advisers to Government and publicly funded scientists have in communicating climate science?default6.  Even though 
defaultvarious
default surveys show different results about the 
defaulttrends in the 
defaultabsolute
default 
defaultlevel of trust in cl
defaultimate scientists
default (for example, 
defaultPoortinga
default et al., 2011 and 
defaultShuckburgh
default et al., 2012)
default, 
defaulttwo recent 
defaultsurveys which focus on 
defaultcomparative
default levels of trust in different sectors clearly indicate that climate scientists 
defaultin the UK 
defaultare significantly more trusted than ot
defaulther sectors such as politicians
default, environmental groups/charities or the media
default to talk about climate science
default (
defaultDonald, 
default2013
default;
default 
defaultShuckburgh
default et al., 2012). 
default7.  In this context, it is worth pointing out that even though they are the most trusted group, scientists 
defaultare often not the most vocal group to be heard in the media.  
defaultA
default RISJ 2010 study on the media coverage of the Copenhagen summit in December 2009 showed that when the climate science was being reported in newspaper articles, university scientists represented
default only 12% of those 
defaultquoted on the science, compared to 11% for representative
defaults
default of environment or development NGOs
default (Painter
default,
default 2010)
default.  This was despite the fact that around 2,000 members of delegations from 250 universities around the world were present
default at the summit
default, including 280 professors.
default8. Part of the explanation for this is that NGOs and governments had far more communication officers or media relations personnel at Copenhagen than universities. For example, Greenpeace alone had more media people
default there than all the universities put together (20 compared to 12). The I
defaultntergovernmental 
defaultPanel on Climate Change (I
defaultPCC
default)
default ha
defaultd
default just one paid media officer
default at the time, although at the time of writing this has since been increased to two
default.
default9. 
defaultThere is plenty of
default scope for 
defaultclimate 
defaultscientists from government departments, universities and other publicly funded bodies to receive more training in 
defaulteffective public engagement, including 
defaulthow to deal with the 
defaultdifferent types of 
defaultmedia.  There 
defaultare 
defaultwell-run organisations off
defaultering excellent training (such as the Science Media Centre)
default.  B
defaultut it remains the case that often scientists are not good communicators with a wider audience beyond their peer group and/or are 
default(understandably) 
defaultreluctant to 
defaultengage
default with the media through fear
default of misrepresentation
default, or being asked to comment beyond their area of expertise or engage in adversarial debate (amongst other factors)
default. 
default More institutional recognition needs to be given to those scientists who do engage with the media, as it requires time
default, 
defaultexperience, 
defaultcommitment and skill.  
default10. The committee asks: defaultHow could public understanding of what is meant by climate change be improved? What are the main barriers to this? defaultDo the mediadefault have a positive role to play?default11. To focus on the media coverage o
defaultf climate change, it is worth stressing that the degree to which media 
defaultcoverage of any particular issue 
defaultaffect
defaults
default or change
defaults
default individual attitudes, understanding 
defaultor behaviour change 
defaultis a disputed area in academic circles. 
defaultMany
default scholars argue that the media ma
defaulty only have a minor impact, when compared to other factors such as wider cultural, social or political values
default and the views of peer groups, family or friends
default.  However, there is much more agreement that the media have a huge role in setting the agenda for 
defaultwhat people talk or think about, even if they have much less of a role
default 
defaultin shaping their views.
default12. In the specific area of science coverage, most people in the UK get their information from the media
default, so the way the media report and frame climate change is
default 
defaultone
default significant input into 
defaultpublic understanding of the topic. 
default13. It is also important to 
defaultpoint to the
default strong evidence that in their consumption of news, the UK public have markedly different levels of 
defaulttrust in different media organis
defaultations and platforms.  In a 2013 report on the digital consumption of news, the RISJ found that despite the advance of new and social media 
defaultsuch as blogs, 
defaultF
defaultacebook
default and Twitter, the web sites of the UK broadcasters were by far the most trusted for news
default 
defaultby 7
default9% of those surveyed
default (Newman and Levy, 2013
default).  These were followed by UK newspaper sites (60%), news-related blogs (11%), Twitter (10%) and 
defaultFacebook
default (8%). 
default14.  
defaultOf the UK broadcasters, the BBC’s coverage of science topics is recognised around the world for
default its high quality. Part of the reason for this is that t
defaulthe BBC 
defaultfor the most part 
defaulttakes considerable pains to follow its editorial guidelines of aiming for ‘due impartiality’ in reporting climate science, in other words asking its correspondents and reporte
defaultrs to reflect the mainstream consensus on climate science while not ruling out the presence of climate sceptics when 
defaulttheir presence is 
defaultdeemed to be appropriate (for example in discussing policy options of how to tackle climate change, rather than the scien
defaultce of climate change).
default15.  However, 
defaultthere have been recent examples 
defaultfrom
default some BBC 
defaultoutput
default such as the Daily Politics Show where the programme might have been better served by inviting climate scientists
default, rather than advocates,
default onto the programme.   In June
default 2012 for example, Friends of the Earth’s Andrew Pendleton was invited to debate with the well-known sceptic blogger, James 
defaultDelingpole
default, the significance of the apparent slowdown in global temperature rises since 1998. Both invitees were not disinterested p
defaultarties to the 
defaultdebate 
defaultor experts on the science
default.  I
defaultt would have been more appropriate to invite two climate scientists with differing views on the significance of the slowdown.
default16. 
defaultA more pressing issue than the BBC’s coverage is the presence of climate sce
defaultptics (of different types) in 
defaultthe 
defaultUK 
defaultprint media, and in particular the right-leaning tabloid press. 
default  The RISJ 2011 study 
default(Painter, 2011) 
defaultof 5,000 articles in six countries in 2007 and 2009/10 showed that the UK’s press is similar to that of the USA in gi
defaultving much more space to sceptical views than in the other four countries examined (Brazil, China, France and India).  
defaultTogether the UK and the USA represented more than 80% of the times sceptical voices were quoted across all six countries.  
default17. Other 
defaultkey 
defaultfindings of this study relevant to the 
defaultselect 
defaultcommittee’s questions are:
default18. 
defaultThe second period under examination (2009-10) was a time when a 
defaultsignificant
default amount of media inclusion of climate sceptic voices could have been expected as it covered the time of 
default‘
defaultClimategate
default’
default 
default(when scientists at the climatic research unit at the University of East Anglia in the UK were accused of manipulating results and keeping critics out of science publications) 
defaultand the questioning of some aspects of the 2007 IPCC reports.  
defaultHowever, f
defaulturther 
defaultexamination of articles on climate change in the UK press from a later period (2010-11) suggests that the presence of sceptic voices remain
defaulted
default high at about one in five of all articles, despite a marked drop in the 
defaulttotal 
defaultnumber of articles covering the topi
defaultc
default (Painter and Gavin, unpublished 2013)
default.
default19. 
defaultThere are several reasons why it is important to reflect on the high presence of climate sceptic voices in the UK print media, and particularly the opinion pages.  The first is that much of the uncontested scept
defaultic opinion is written by in-house columnists and not climate scientists.  Th
defaultis could give the impression to a general audience that climate science is 
defaulta matter of opinion or merely
default ‘a point of view’, in the same way as many political issues are, without gi
defaultving the readers a sense of what most climate scientists 
defaultsay is the case about rising temperatures and the 
defaultcauses of 
defaultthem
default.
default20. 
defaultA second important aspect to consider is the effect on readers of the promulgation of uncertainty, and in particular the view oft
defaulten put forward by sceptics that there is significant disagreement amongst scientists.  There is evidence from a recent study carried out with focus groups in the UK that many people believe that there is a lack of consensus in scientific opinion, partly be
defaultcause this is frequently 
defaultthe way climate science is presented in the media.  The participants thought that scientists are often in disagreement with each other or change their mind over time
default (
defaultShuckburgh
default et al, 2012)
default.  
default21.  Moreover, research carried out b
defaulty communicat
defaultions scholars in the USA sugges
defaultt
defaults
default that uncertainty generated - deliberately or not - in peoples’ minds about the level of agreement amongst scientists can make a big difference for engagement.  P
defaulteople
default who (wrongly) believe that scientists disag
defaultree on global warming tend to feel less certain that global warming is occurring, and show less support for climate policy
default (Ding Ding et al., 2011)
default.  
defaultLikewise, 
defaultthe lead author of the 
defaultresearch done by the Glasgow Media Group found that 
defaulti
defaultn 
defaulttheir focus 
defaultgroups
default in the UK
default, 
default‘
defaultthe uncertainty of the science left the evidence open to interpret
defaultation by a range of experts.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultParticipants said they were very reliant on these interpretations due to the complexity of the subject, and yet found it difficult to place faith i
defaultn any of them – hence stalemate, and disengagement.
default’ 
default(Catherine Happer quoted in Painter, 2013) 
default22. 
defaultA 2013 study by the RISJ 
default(Painter, 2013) 
defaultsuggests that risk language can in certain circumstances and with certain groups be a more helpful of talking abou
defaultt climate change than uncertainty
default, and particularly for policy makers
default.  It is certainly the language now being used by a wide variety of politicians and scientific reports on climate change. 
default23. Part of the 
defaultchallenge
default is that scientific uncertainty is ofte
defaultn misunderstood, particularly by the general public, and misinterpreted as ignorance.  For example, many people fail to recognise the distinction between ‘school science’, which 
defaultis 
defaulta
default source of solid facts and reliable understanding
default, and ‘research science’ 
defaultwhere uncertainty is engrained and is often the impetus for further investigation. Risk on the other hand is an essential part of everyday experience, including the worlds of insurance, health and investment.   
default23.  
defaultThe RISJ
default 
default2013 
defaultstudy, which looked at mo
defaultre than 300 articles 
defaulton climate change 
defaultin the print media in six countries, found that the media on the whole overwhelmingly use a narrative of ‘disasters’ and ‘uncertainty’, when reporting climate change. 
defaultThe language of risk (and of opportunity) was much
default less prevalent.  
defaultStudies show that d
defaultisaster and uncertainty frames – at least in their more extreme forms - are not usually seen as enhancing public understanding, engagement or behaviour change
default (Moser and 
defaultDilling
default 2004, O’Neill and Nicholson-Cole, 2010)
default. 
default 
default24. 
defaultRecommendationsdefaultMore research 
defaultis needed 
defaultinto the effect of certain messages
default about climate change
default in the media and elsewhere on public understanding, e
defaultngagement and behaviour change. It is often wrongly assumed that simply giving the public more infor
defaultmation about climate science will promote ‘better’ engagement, when most communication theory suggests that most people filter information about climate science through their cultural values.  Dialogue and discussion are 
defaultoften 
defaultmore effective than top-down 
defaultinformation. 
defaultScientific uncertainty about climate change (for example, the timing, severity and location of 
defaultfuture 
defaultimpact
defaults
default) is particularly difficult to convey without confusing the public. More work need
defaults
default to be done on 
defaulttesting 
defaultwhat sort of messages 
defaultand l
defaultanguage 
defaultmight help
default with what sectors of society
default, and whether risk is a more productive language.
defaultIn the specific area of risk and uncertainty communication, for the media, 
defaultFor scientists,
defaultIn genera
defaultl, 
default&#xa0;
defaultReferencesdefaultDonald, 
defaultRos
default, ‘Polling reveals public trust scientists most on climate’, 
defaultCarbon Brief
default, 2 April 2013. 
defaultDing 
defaultDing
default et al, ‘Support for climate policy and societal action are linked to perceptions about scientific agreement’, 
defaultLetter to Nature
default, December 2011. 
defaultGlasgow Media Group, 
default‘
defaultClimate Change and Energy Security: Assessing the Impact of Information and its 
defaultDelivery on Attitudes and Behaviour’, 
defaultUK Energy Research Centre
default, London 2012
default.
defaultMoser, S
defaultusanne
default and 
defaultDilling
default, L (2004), ‘Making climate hot; communicating the urgency and challenge of global climate change’, 
defaultEnvironment
default, 46, pp. 32-46.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultNewman Nic and Levy D., 
defaultDigital News Report
default 2013
default, RISJ, Oxford 2013.
defaultO’Neill, S
defaultaffron
default and Nicholson-Cole, S. (2009) ‘"Fear won't do it": promoting positive engagement with climate change through visual and iconic representations’, 
defaultScience Communication
default, 30
default, 355-379
defaultPainter James, 
defaultSummoned by Science: Reporting Climate Change at Copenhagen and Beyond,
default RISJ, Oxford 2010.
defaultPainter James, 
defaultPoles Apart: The international reporting of climate 
defaultskepticism,
default RISJ, Oxford
default 2011.
defaultPainter James, 
defaultClimate Change in the 
defaultMedia: reporting risk and uncertainty
default, RISJ
default/I.B. 
defaultTauris
default, Oxford, forthcoming 2013. 
defaultPainter James and Ashe
default T.
default, 
default‘
defaultCross-national comparison of the presence of climate scepticism in the print media i
defaultn six countries, 2007–10
default’
default, 2012 
defaultEnviron. Res. 
defaultLett
default.
default 
default7default 044005
defaultPainter J
defaultames
default and Gavin N. ‘Climate scepticism in the British press’, 
defaultunpublished manuscript
default 2013.
default&#xa0;
defaultPoortinga
default, 
defaultWouter
default, et al, ‘Uncertain climate: An investigation into public scepticism
default 
defaultabout anthropogenic climate change’, 
defaultGlobal Environmental Change 
default21 (3)
default 
default(2011), pp. 1015–24.
default&#xa0;
defaultShuckburgh, Emily, 
defaultet al.
default, ‘Climate Science, the Public and the News Media: Summary Findings of a Survey and Focus Groups Conducted in the UK in March 2011’, Lond
defaulton: Living With Environmental Change, 2012.
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default