&#xa0;defaultWWC002default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultDiane defaultReaydefault, Professor of Educationdefault defaultUniversity of Cambridgedefault&#xa0;defaultThis report is primarily ba
defaultsed on my 
defaultfindings from 8 funded 
defaultresearch projects spanning the last 15 years
default,
default but it is also grounded in my personal exp
defaulterience of social mobility as a person 
defaultwho has moved
default,
default from a coal mining community
default,
default 
defaultinto
default 
defaultthe upper echelons of academia 
defaultvia nineteen years  of teaching in working class schools. 
default 
default&#xa0;defaultSummary points: default&#xa0;default              
defaultWe cannot make sense of contemporary
default white
default working class underachievement 
defaultwithout investigating its historical roots
default. 
default              
defaultWorking class underachievement is not just about the attitudes and beha
defaultviour of the working classes b
defaultut also the attitudes 
defaultand behaviour 
defaultof the upper and middle classes and the relationships between all three classes
default – ‘no class is an island’
default. 
default 
default              
defaultSchools reflect wider society’s attitudes and values
default rather than being able to compensate for them
default. An effec
defaulttive policy for tackling white 
defaultworking class underachievement would have to address economic and social 
default 
defaultconditions as well as focusing on the educational system. 
defaultCurrent policies have increased segregation and polarisation
default, 
defaultboth within schools and between them
default. defaultSocial distance between social classes has grown
default in schools, mirroring the growing social distance in wider society. 
default defaultAs the 
defaultwhite working classes are increasingly devalued and 
defaultresidualised
default within the educational system their learner ide
defaultntities have become more
default fragile and 
defaultunconfident. 
defaultW
defaulte need a
defaultn educational sy
defaultstem that accords respect to
default the white workin
defaultg classes; a system that attributes
default po
defaultsitive value to
default 
defaultworki
defaultngclassness
default. 
defaultA range of  s
defaulttrategies focused on curriculum and 
default school level 
defaultare listed. 
default&#xa0;default1.   
defaultThe prevalent commonsense view 
defaultis either 
defaultthat the white working classes are to blame for their 
defaultrelative 
defaultunderachievement, that it is about cultural deficits, lack of ambition,  and the wrong sorts of attitudes
default, 
default 
defaultor 
defaultthat cer
defaulttain schools and their staff are failing the working classes. But white working class educational underachievement is far more complex than either the cultural deficit analysis or failing school thesis allows. 
defaultFirst, w
defaulte need  an historical perspective in o
defaultrder  to understand why schooling has not worked for the working classes
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA brief history of defaultwhite defaultworking class underachievement default&#xa0;
default2.  
defaultThe growing middle-class commitment to worki
defaultng-class education in the late 
defaulteighteenth and early nineteenth centuries w
defaultas totally different from their ideals for middle-
defaultclass education but was  rather a means  of ensuring that the lower classes  would acquiesce in middle class aspirations
default.
default Adam Smith 
defaultepitomised
default this English bourgeois viewpoint regarding working class educa
defaulttion in 
defaultThe Wealth of Nations
default:
default&#xa0;
defaultAn instructed and intelligent people besides are always more
defaultdecent and orderly than an ignorant one ... less apt to be misled
defaultinto any wanton or unnecessary opposition to the measures of the
defaultgovernment. (Smith, 1785, p. 
default305)
default&#xa0;
defaultFor Smith, as well as for the vast majority of the  political  and intellectual elite at the time, the schooling of the working classes was always to be subordinate and inferior to that of the middle classes, designed to contain and pacify rather 
defaultthan to educate and liberate.
defaultWhen  state education for all was introduced 
default a hundred years after the publication of 
defaultThe Wealth of 
defaultNations  
defaultthe provision of education for working-class children was thought of by and large instrumentally, rather than as lik
defaultely to contribute to the life possibilit
defaulties of the children themselves. T
defaulthe intention of the dominant classes was still to police and control the working classes ra
defaultther than to educate them. A
defaultny n
defaultotion of education as a means of working class educational s
defaultuccess 
default has always been tempered by the ruling elites’ instrumental view of education as a form of control of the white working classes. 
default&#xa0;
default3.   
defaultSo d
defaultenial of working class value within schooling has a long and damaging history dating from the inception of s
defaulttate schooling for all. This makes the white working class experience of education qualitatively and quantitatively different from that of their BME counterparts. The white working classes bring to their experience of schooling a collective memory of educa
defaulttional subordination and marginalization that is less the case for BME groups
default. 
defaultChildren negotiate schooling not only directly through their own experiences but also through the 
defaultsedimented
default experiences of parents and even grandparents. 
defaultW
defaulthite working class fa
defaultmilies  expectations of social mobility through education are often minimal, conditioned by their own experiences over several generations. Both the historical legacy, and how it is played out in the present, are different for many BME working class groups
default. Some of these bring histories of educational achievement in their countries of origin. Others, despite a lack of educational credentials, bring a strong conviction that a fresh start in the British educational system will provide crucial opportunities  f
defaultor their children’s advancement that were denied to them.  
default&#xa0;
defaultClass is relational and results in a default contemporary educational culture of winners and losersdefault&#xa0;
default4.   
defaultThe 
default historical legacy of being  the inferior ‘other’ within education resonates in the present. The same two barriers that were present at the inception of state schooling still exist. The working classes continue to have access to relatively low levels of th
defaulte kind of material, cultural and psychological resources
default that a
defaultid educational success.  First, most  cannot
default afford the private tuition and the enriching cultural activities that many middle class parents invest in for their children. Nor do they have the s
defaultame degree of confidence and sense of entitlement that the middle classes possess  in their interactions with schooling. 
defaultSecond, 
defaultthe negative representations that 
defaultcharacterised
default the past  continue in
default the prese
defaultnt. N
defaultow we have skivers and 
defaultchavs
default  rather than s
defaultcum  and dross  but the same processes of class 
defaultothering
default are still at work.  And just as class is relational  in that we cannot fully understand working class 
default attitudes and 
defaultbehaviou
defaultr
default  without  contextualizing them in relation to middl
defaulte class attitudes and
default 
defaultbehavi
defaultour
default so 
defaulteducational success and failure is relational. Those who succeed do so at the expense of others’ failure. 
default&#xa0;
default5.   
defaultWe may have become ‘an 
defaultaspirational
default nation’ but we are not a socially mobile one; desires and aspirations cannot compensate for l
defaultack of 
defaultfamily 
defaultresources. 
defaultAnd as Wilkinson and Pickett point out, educational failure becomes more prevalent as
default societies become more unequal.
default The irony is that the rhetoric of social mobility 
defaultwithin 
defaulteducation has increased in volume and intensity as 
default it has 
defaultbecome less and less possible in practice. We cannot all succeed academically. If we did what counts now as educational success would lose its value. Numerous studies indicate that one of the key lessons middle class children learn is that failure 
defaultis intolerable, unwanted and belong
defaults somewhere else. We see this in the ESRC project I conducted on white middle class parents sending their children to state comprehensives: 
default&#xa0;
defaultI had everything that the working class kids didn't have.  You know everything 
defaultthat my mum and dad had given me and I was more intelligent than they were and there was more going for me than there was for them
default….b
defaulteing friends with these people made me feel like the one you know who was achieving you know and was superior to them. (Cam
defaultilla
default,  year 
default13 student, 
defaultwhite middle class
default).
default&#xa0;
default6.   
defaultEvident also is a sense of intrinsic superiority that was even more potent in the 
default words of the 
defaultprivately educated students I interviewed for a further ESRC project on HE choice: 
default&#xa0;
default              
defaultI just expected to go t
defaulto a good university. I knew I was a lot more intelligent 
default              
defaultand cultured 
defaultthan ordinary kids. (Will, private school student)
default&#xa0;
defaultImportance of wider social and economic conditionsdefault&#xa0;
default7.   
defaultEducation reflects wider social and economic conditions. We are at a point 
defaultin time when the power of the working classes economically and socially is diminishing while the power of the elites has increased
default, 
default and the middle classes are struggling to maintain their position in  society. There is also a troubling growth in the social distance between the classes. When I was growing up as a working class child in the 50s and 60s, my educational success rested par
defaulttly on the empathy and kindness of the parents of my middle class classmates who invited me to complete my homework in houses with space and places to concentrate. Today, the middle class parents I interviewed talk of  mistrust and even fear of the white w
defaultorking classes: 
default              
defaultHe doesn’t bring these children home but at least he knows where they come from
default. 
default 
default              
defaultI have to admit a great fear was that my son would get in with the scrap metal dealer’s son. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI get anxious at the thought of the girls from the council
default estate coming round because we have so much and they have so little, there is always a nagging fear they might take something. 
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultA judgmental system: defaultThe impact of educational policies default&#xa0;
default8.   
defaultThere is not the space to discuss the impact of the many polic
defaulties introduced over th
defaulte last 3 decades but  I will use two examples, 
default the contemporary assessment and testing regime 
defaultand the  growth of setting and streaming in schools to show how 
defaultlarge numbers of working class children 
defaultare 
defaultsee
default to be of 
defaultlow value
default 
defaultin our c
defaulturrent educational system
default. 
defaultW
defaulthile the 
defaultstated aim is to raise the achievement of all children, one consequen
defaultce of the increased testing
default of students’ learning is
default the fixing of failure in the working classes. 
default While most of my research is on secondary school students I carried out a research study on the impact  of testing on primary age children. Below are two
default quotes from white working class girls: 
defaultNorma: I’m really worried about the SATs.
defaultD: Why?
defaultNorma: Well
default it seems like I’ll get no points or I won’t be able to
defaultdo it, too hard or something.
defaultD: What would it mean to get no points?
defaultNorma: Well instead of being a level three I’ll be a nothing and
defaultdo badly – very badly.
defaultAnd:
default&#xa0;
defaultSharon: I think I’ll get a two, only
default Stuart will get a six.
defaultD: So if Stuart gets a six, what will that say about him?
defaultSharon: He’s heading for a good job and a good life, and it shows
defaulthe’s not 
defaultgonna
default be living on the streets and stuff like that.
defaultD: And if you get a level two, what will that 
defaultsay about you?
defaultSharon: Um, I might not have a good life in front of me, and I might
defaultgrow up and do something naughty.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe quotes make visible the system of value that produces the middle classes as valuable academic stars whilst simultaneously generating 
defaulta working class that is represented within the current testing regimes as ‘incapable’ of having a self with value. This is further revealed in Sharon’s poignant summation of class destinies and how they are tied to academic achi
defaultevement. 
defaultAs the  children’s 
defaultquotes illustrate, at the micro-level of the classroom there are regular glimpses of the 
defaultnormalising
default and regulatory function of testing on children. However, although children expressed anxieties across class differences, it was not the white middle-class 
defaultboys panicking about being exposed as no good through the assessment procedures. Rather, it was white working-class girls 
defaultwho agonized the most
default that they would be ‘a nothing’. And the risks of finding they have very little value are disproportionately high
default for such working class girls. These girls, in the context of schooling, inhabit a psychic economy of class defined by fear, anxiety and unease where failure looms large and success is elusive; a place where too often they are seen
default and see themselves as la
defaultcking value
default. 
default&#xa0;
default9.   
defaultThe increase in setting and streaming compounds and reinforces working class pupils
default’
default sense of  failure, they come to see themselves as ‘bottom set kids’  or in ‘a rubbish group’ but it also leads to class segregation 
defaultin state schooling 
defaultas these quotes from 
defaultmiddle class pupils at state comprehensives 
default show: 
defaultMy friends and I were a bit scared of all the 
defaultchavs
default there may be in secondary but its fine 
defaultcos
default we are in the top set and they are all in the bottom sets so I don’t have to see them (O
defaultlivia year 8)
default&#xa0;
defaultIt was quite tough
default in the first year with the 
defaultcha
defaultvs
default  but now I’m in year 8 its fine 
defaultcos
default I’ve been moved up to the higher sets and they’ve been moved down so I’m away from them (Jessie year 8)
defaultThe consequences for the white working classesdefault&#xa0;
default1
default0.    
defaultThe findings from the research projects I have conducted 
defaultreveal how the educational system works to positively affirm white 
defaultupper and 
defaultmiddle class identities, acting as a means of finding yourself as a successful ‘bright’ learner. In contrast, the ed
defaultucational system is rarely about positive affirmation for the working classes.  They are at far greater risk of losing rather than finding themselves, of both being unable to construct a successful learner identity and feeling  that their working class roo
defaultts and sense of self have no value in a context where working class culture and identity is constructed as a hindrance to academic achievement. The sense of shame and humiliation was palpable throughout the interviews I carried out with white working class
default pupils in London schools fo
defaultr an ESCR study on pupils’  perspectives on their teaching and learning
default: 
default&#xa0;
defaultDanny: Some teachers say, ‘That isn’t the way you talk’ – like
defaultputting you down. I think telling you a different way is
defaultsort of good, but I think the way
default they do it isn’t good
defaultbecause they make you look stupid.
defaultMartin: Those teachers look down on you
defaultDanny: Yeah, like they think you’re dumb … we don’t expect them
defaultto treat us like their own children. We’re not. But we are
defaultstill kids. I’d say to them, You’ve
default got kids. You treat them
defaultwith love but you don’t need to love us. All you need to
defaultdo is treat us like humans.
defaultThese commonplace feelings of  shame and humiliation often turned into a sense of futility and pointlessness in relation to academic learning: 
defaultD
defaultiane : If you had a choice what would you choose to learn?
default  
defaultJason: Nothing 
defaultGeorge: Nothing 
defaultAndy: No idea 
defaultPaul: Definitely nothing we get here
default&#xa0;
default 
default11.    
defaultIn the project secondary school students were asked  whether they felt that they had the confidence t
defaulto act within schooling; whether they felt they belonged, as individuals and as groups, within the school communi
defaultty
default. The vast majority of the working class students talked about a sense of  powerlessness and educational worthlessness,  and feelings that the
defaulty were not really valued and respected within education. But it was 
default white 
defaultworking class boys, in particular, who manifested the 
default greatest sense of 
defaultalienation
default. 
default 
default12.    
defaultW
defaulthite working class students are expected to make difficult choices between prioritizin
defaultg official pedagogic practices on the one hand and local pedagogic practices on the other,  and for boys in particular, between popularity among the peer group  and an elusive successful learner identity. This is especially so for white working clas
defaults boys 
default like Shaun quoted below: 
default 
defaultShaun: Like now I am different in the classroom than I am in the playground, I am just different.
defaultDiane: Right, so how are you different?
defaultShaun: In the classroom I am not myself. I am hard working and everything. In the playgrou
defaultnd, yeah, I’m back to my usual self…just being normal.
default&#xa0;
defaultShaun recognizes that,  unlike their middle class counterparts, working class students need to transform their identity in order to succeed. And transformation is a fraught, risky, and often painful struggle if you and your kind have historically been, and
default are currently positioned as ‘other’ to the educated, intelligent and cultured subject. For Shaun academic success is not normative and he has to literally think  and enact himself as ‘other’ in order to attempt to do well. Facing an educational competitio
defaultn they cannot win they construct  peer group macho and physically aggressive competitions where some of  them can and do win. 
default&#xa0;defaultSocial Justice for the white working classesdefault13.    
defaultI 
defaultgrow up during the early years of the welfare state, the daughter of a coal miner living in a newly built council estate. An expanding welfare state 
default 
defaultand a pervasive rhetoric of providing services and homes fit for working- class war heroes raised
default 
defaultthe sens
defaulte of pride and entitlement among the working classes. It
default also softened some of the judg
defaultmental superiority of significant numbers of the middle and upper classes towards those they traditionally viewed as inferior. Also, entering the 
defaultlabour
default market during a 
defaultperiod of large-scale expansion of 
default 
defaultprofessional jobs meant gaining a middle-class job was much more likely than it is in the economically austere 2010s. Such economic and social circumstances were far more 
defaultfavourable
default to working-class upward mobility  than
default the current situation, and eased what was s
defaulttill a difficult trajectory for man
defaulty working-class children like myself. 
default14.    
defaultThe roots of my 
defaultsocial mobility lay in a
default synergy between 
defaulta working-class community
default characterized by  a powerful sense o
defaultf pride in b
defaulteing working class and 
defaulta strong and informed political consciousness, and a very particular historical juncture. Without these predisposing
default 
defaultfactors, my social mobility would not have occurred. I certainly would not have been socially mobile as a child grow
defaulting up in the early twenty-first century.
default15.    
defaultW
defaulte need an educational sy
defaultstem founded on respect for
default the white working classes
default instead of trying to make them all middle class
default; a system that accords po
defaultsitive value and meaning to
default 
defaultworki
defaultngclassness
default. 
defaultW
defaulthile
default 
defaultthe 3Rs are  important, teaching children to be  caring, respectful,  cooperative, knowledgeable about their own and others’ histories, and well informed about contemporary global 
defaultissues are equally 
defaultimportant. There is a great deal of scope for widening cu
defaultrrently narrowly conceived teaching and learning oppo
defaultrtunities, and for  developing 
default pedagogies
default  that  encourage students to question  as well as develop 
defaultsocial and political awareness. 
defaultTeaching for social justice 
defaultrequires a reflexive focus  on all pupils:
default 
default What are their hopes, dreams and 
defaultaspir
defaultations? Their passions and commitments? What skills, abilities, and capacities does eac
defaulth one bring to the classroom? As Ayers (1998) argues ‘t
defaulteaching for social justice is teaching that arouses students, engages them
default in a quest to identify obstacles to their full humanity, to their freedom, and then to drive, to move a
defaultgainst those obstacles
default.
default16.    
defaultA revalorizing of vocational  and working class 
defaultknowledges
default and a broadening out of what constitutes educational success b
defaulteyond the nar
defaultrowly academic is long overdue. T
defaulthere needs to be  not only a 
defaultfocus on, and valuing of, the existing 
defaultknowledges
default of working-class young people,
default but also pedagogies which 
defaultemphasise
default 
defaultcollectivist, rather than individualistic approaches to 
defaultlearning.
default17.    
defaultUntil we eradicate class contempt schools will continue to be characterized by pervasive 
defaultand 
defaultdamaging working class educational failure. 
defaultT
defaulthe political elites and the middle class majority 
default need 
defaultto critically 
defaultanalyse
default, understand and take re
defaultsponsibility for a situation that only they
default have the power and resources to
default remedy
default, 
default but creating an educational system that 
defaultworks towards decreasing
default the social , economic and educational distance between the social classes, both within schools and wider s
defaultociety, would be a good place to start. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultPractical ways forward in tackling white working class underachievementdefault&#xa0;default7. 
default              
defaultGive all pupils achieving below level 4  in English and Maths at  the end of year 5 an entitlement of 1 to 1 tuition with a trained teacher for at least half an hour a day for the first two terms of year 6. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default