&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by New Charter Housing Trustdefault1.0default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultExecutive Summarydefault&#xa0;default2.0default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultNew Charter Housing Trustdefault2.1
default              
defaultNew Charter Housing Trust is a Regi
defaultstered Provider of Social Housing, based in Tameside in Greater Manchester
default.
default  The group also includes 
defaultGedling Homes, based in Gedling, Nottinghamshire
default and Knowsley Housing Options, based in Merseyside
default.
default2.3
default              
defaultThe New Charter Homes includes three contracted 
defaultservices delivering homelessness advice and support. These are:
default2.4
default              
defaultThrough the delivery of these three services, New Charter has a detailed working knowledge of working with homeless 
defaulthou
defaultseholds
default. All three services work closely with 
defaultthe local authorities they are contract
defaulted
default to, 
defaultand
default ensure best practice performance, value for money and a reduction in overall costs.
default2.5
default              
defaultKnowsley and Tameside have had considerable success in the past 2 years 
defaultin reducing the overall cost of temporary accommodation, both to DWP and the local authority.
default2.6
default              
defaultBased on our analysis of the impact of the current proposals, we have serious concerns over the impact on homeless households, as well as the financial impact
default on local authorities. We 
defaulturge the DWP to consider the regional implications of the current proposals to avoid significantly increased costs
default3.0default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultMonthly Anniversary Assessmentsdefault3.1
default              
defaultThe assessment of the housing element of universal credit on the anniversary of the claim (thereby in monthly cycles) represents one of our biggest areas of concern, and 
defaultof the greatest potential increase in
default costs to DWP and local authorities if implemente
defaultd as currently proposed.
default3.2
default              
defaultWe are aware that Homeless Link has already developed a number of examples of how this will impact on individuals.  We can see no practical way of working within these proposals that will not lead to increased costs for DWP and
default to the Local Authority.
default3.3
default              
defaultIn
default Tameside and Knowsley our use B&amp;Bs is limited to statutory duty where no other suitable options are available, and for the minimum period of stay in order to reduce costs to DWP and the Authority.
default3.4
default              
defaultWithin Tameside, B&amp;B is
default used as a last resort for those unable to move into short term supported accommodation.  Households are moved to lower cost accommodation at the first available opportunity.  
defaultIn Knowsley the current temporary accommodation model is B &amp; B for the majority 
defaultof placements.  
defaultAverage weekly cost 
defaultof
default B&amp;B in Tameside in 2013 is £
default967 per household
default and in Knowsley is £504 per household
default. 
default3.5
default              
defaultIn order to ensure that the housing costs are taken into account, 
defaultauthorities
default will have no option but to increase length of stay until after the anniversary of the claim.  For households making a new claim on the day of placement, this will be a full calendar month.  For those who have an existing claim, the period until the next a
defaultnniversary could be up to 8 weeks.
default3.6
default              
defaultThe need to ensure rental costs are met through the housing element, leading to a need to increase length of stay will mean that households will remain in high cost B&amp;B accommodation even after more suitable, lower co
defaultst accommodation has become available, or where the council’s statutory duty has ended.  
default3.7
default              
defaultIn 2012-13, t
defaulthe a
defaultverage length of stay 
defaultper household 
defaultin 
defaultTameside 
defaultwas 
default7
default days, at an average cost of 
default£165
default per placement
default.  
defaultThe increased length of stay in order to a
defaultllow for the housing assessment to take place 
defaultwould mean an increase of £
default1,934
default – 
default£5,802
default per household, per placement.  
default3.5
default              
defaultE
defaultven where customers have been placed in B&amp;B under a statutory duty within a day of the anniversary of their claim, there will be an
default increased cost to DWP as universal credit is paid monthly in arrears.  Therefore, the customer or landlord will receive benefits relating to housing they may have only occupied for a matter of days.  The same will be true where customers move from higher 
defaultcost accommodation (such as B&amp;B) into social or private sector housing at a much lower cost.  The Housing Element relating to the high cost accommodation will continue to be paid until after the anniversary of the claim, again leading to greater cost to DW
defaultP.
default4.0default              defaultBenefit Capdefault4.1
default              
defaultThe current proposals to apply the benefit cap to households living in temporary accommodation will negatively impact on households who have been placed in higher cost accommodation, such as hostels or B&amp;B.  As the duty to secure tem
defaultporary accommodation under homelessness legislation is an absolute, there are occasions where placement in higher cost accommodation is unavoidable where no other suitable accommodation is available. The legislation and case law surrounding affordability i
defaultn regards to intentional homelessness means that the additional cost of this accommodation will necessarily fall to the local authority.
default4.2
default              
defaultFor example, in Tameside the weekly cost of a single person in B&amp;B is £
default239
default and for a family is £
default434
default.  This leaves a
default shortfall of £
default149
default or £
default313
default respectively.  In Knowsley the costs 
defaultof a single person in B &amp; B is £
default280
default and for a family is £
default504
default.  This leaves a shortfall of £
default190 or £383 respectively
default.
default The authority could require the household to make up this shortfall themselves, if they have the means to do so.  The likelihood is however, that a benefit dependant family would not have the means to meet this cost without a negative impact on essential 
defaultliving costs.  This would be particularly true where households have been placed in B&amp;B and food costs will therefore be higher due to the inability to cook.  The household would therefore fall into arrears on their accommodation costs and be evicted from 
defaulttheir accommodation.  However, as the accommodation was unaffordable to them, the local authority would still retain a duty to secure temporary accommodation for them.  The only practical solution for an authority would be to meet the cost of the shortfall
default for the duration of the placement.  This would increase the non-recoverable costs 
defaultto be paid by the authority.  
default4.3
default              
defaultIn Knowsley this increase would be a 
default14
default% 
defaultweekly 
defaultrise on 2012-13 costs
default and 16% rise in Tameside
default.  If the current proposals for housing elem
defaultent assessments are also 
defaultimplemented, 
defaultthe combination of increased length of stay and increased non recoverable costs could lead to an annual increase in non-recoverable costs of
default over 2000%
default in Tameside alone. 
default5.0default              defaultUniversal Creditdefault5.1
default              
defaultWe are relieved to se
defaulte that under the current proposals additional management costs relating to temporary accommodation will be met through Discretionary Housing Payments, 
defaultensuring that universal credit will not be a bar to using temporary accommodation for universal credit cl
defaultaimants.  However, 
defaultwe have serious concerns regarding the practical implications of placing customer in temporary ac
defaultcommodation on universal credit for both the claimant and the services supporting them.
default5.2
default              
defaultTemporary accommodation is by its nature short t
defaulterm and households may make a number of moves within a short period before suitable long term accommodation is secured.  For example, where a customer is accepted as homeless in one authority but has no local connection and so the duty is transferred to an
defaultother authority, the customer would be required to move to accommodation in the accepting authority area.  In Tameside and Knowsley customers placed in high cost accommodation may be required to move into lower cost accommodation when it becomes available,
default or may be moved into more accommodation more suitable to their needs (such as due to area or support needs) or for housing management issues.
default5.3
default              
defaultCosts for each accommodation may vary greatly.  Customers under universal credit would be expected to notify 
defaultof a change of circumstances upon moving, as well as to manage their finances to ensure the correct rents are paid to the landlords of each accommodation, and that any underspend is retained to be repaid to DWP in the event of an over payment or to be used
default to meet costs of higher rents where claims have not yet been processed.  We believe that this is too much to expect of households in crisis and will lead to claimants being subject to sanctions or facing further homelessness where housing costs are not me
defaultt.
default5.4
default              
defaultIf managed payments to landlords were to be retained, this would reduce the hardship to the household, however 
defaultwould increase the workload and resource needs for local authorities.  In order to ensure that correct claims and notifications have been 
defaultmade to universal credit, and to reconcile monthly payments in arrears to the rents paid to the landlords we anticipate that homelessness and housing advice services will need to employ additional staff.  In Tameside and Knowsley, which are small authoriti
defaultes with a low number of temporary accommodation placements per quarter, we anticipate an additional member of staff for each service would be required to meet this need.  This would create an additional cost to the authorities of £
default30,000
default 
defaulteach.  Multiplied 
defaultby each authority area and factoring in larger authorities 
defaultwith large numbers of placements, this would create a significant additional cost for local authorities to meet in order to ensure households living in temporary accommodation are not faced with fu
defaultrther homelessness or benefit sanctions.
default6.0default              defaultSize Criteria default6.1
default              
defaultUnder the current proposals, customers living in temporary accommodation owned by the local authority are not exempt from the social sector size criteria, although those in most other types of
default temporary accommodation are.
default6.2
default              
defaultKnowsley Council are currently developing a dispersed model of temporary 
defaultaccommodation. Properties will at time be under occupied in line with the size criteria and therefore result in a short fall for the occupier, who ar
defaulte benefit dependent and would not have the means to meet the shortfall
default7.0default              defaultManaged payment of Rent to Landlordsdefault7.1
default              
defaultWe are pleased that DWP is currently seeking views as to whether people receiving Universal Credit and living in temporary accommodation hav
defaulte their rent paid straight to the landlords.  
defaultO
defaultur view
default is 
defaultthat it is 
defaultessential that the current arrangements of direct payment to landlords 
defaultare
default maintained.
default7.2
default              
defaultOur reasons for this are:
default8.0default              defaultFurther options to considerdefault8.1
default              
defaultIf the current proposals for monthly assessments of claims and change of circumstances are implemente
defaultd
default, local authorities could consider a number of options:
default8.2
default              
defaultThe fundamental disadvantage to these options is that, in order to ensure the rental costs are 
defaultcove
defaultred;
default authorities will be required to place households until their first anniversary of their claim, leading to an increased length of stay and cost to local authorities and DWP
default.
default8.3
default              
defaultAnother option for local authorities would be to use 6 month ASTs in the p
defaultrivate rented sector in order to discharge temporary accommodation duty.  We understand that this is common practice in some of the southern local authorities.  This would resolve many of the issues around managed payments to landlords and the benefit cap.
default  We have 2 practical concerns regarding the operational logistics of implementing this where it is not already in practice:
default8.4
default              
defaultAuthorities could consider commissioning a
defaultdditional exempt accommodation to use as temporary accommodation.  Given that budgets for 2013-14 have now been set, this would not be viable without grant funding from DCLG.  In addition, under the current proposals for social size criteria and benefit ca
defaultps, authorities may be concerned that such schemes would not be cost viable. In addition, the need to keep customers in accommodation for a minimum of 4 weeks in order to ensure housing element is met would mean that such schemes could not be used for cris
defaultis bed spaces, leaving authorities needing to use B&amp;B to meet statutory temporary accommodation duties.
default9.0default              defaultRecommendations for Actiondefault&#xa0;
default10 September 2013
default8
default&#xa0;
default