EIS 04
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the British Aggregates Association (BAA)defaultExecutive SummarydefaultThe UK has an active domestic 
defaultminerals 
defaultextract
defaultion
default industry providing national wealth, employment and resource security 
defaultto the construction industry and 
defaultto
default a wide spectrum of consumer and manufacturing  industries.  The UK also has abundant reserves and the sector could grow and provide
default additional employment and resource security.
defaultIn addition the industry has an enviable and world-leading reputation for the highest level of restoration and after-care following mineral extraction (generally over and above planning requirements)  with resp
defaultect to landscape, tree planting,  environment and to biodiversity and geodiversity. 
defaultThe sector would benefit from 
defaultThe publicly listed mining houses on the UK Stock Market and with London HQs generally have little direct involvement in  any of the UK domestic 
defaultmining industry
default. 
defaultThe UK minerals extraction industry is 
defaultrepresented through the CBI 
defaultMinerals Group
default. The broader stakeholder interests for the industry sector including national, regional and local government and NGOs is through the UK National Minerals Forum established for this purpose in 2007. I
defaultn addition 
defaultthe industry engage with 
defaultWestmi
defaultnster
default through the A
defaultssociate
default Parliamentary Minerals Group
default (AP
defaultMG)
default. 
defaultThe
default 
defaultUK 
defaultminerals
default extraction
default industry has not been involved with the EITI initiative which appears to be of little consequence to
default our sector. However, we do note that HMG reiterated its econom
defaultic and growth policy objectives in item (8) of its notes to the
default EITI launch
default 
defaultPress Release
default dated 9
defaultth
default July which we do fully support. 
default 
defaultWe trus
defaultt that 
defaultthe
default 
defaultEITI 
defaultinitiative will not 
defaultmake
default any additional imposition
defaults
default on
default an already overburdened and regulated
default 
defaultdomestic minerals industry compared to our colleagues in other countries; and particularly not to SMEs.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultIntroduction and BackgrounddefaultThis response 
defaultis on behalf of the 
defaultB
defaultritish Aggregates Association
default 
default(BAA)
default  as well as for 
defaultThe Barytes Association
default (TBA)
default of which I am Director
default;
default and also various other interests in the minerals industry in the UK, Europe and globally gained in over 40 years experience mainly at the sharp end of industry.
defaultBAA
default represent
defaults
default the interests of 
defaultsome 11
default0 members of which some 
default70
default are independent and privatel
defaulty-owned SME quarry companies throughout the UK with some 1
default3
default% of national output and who operate out of 
defaultsome
default 
default30
default0 sites.
default 
defaultTBA members provide 
defaultglobally 
defaulttwo-thirds of the barytes consumed in the oil and gas drilling, TV and PC glass, and automotive industries.
default There are three UK members who mine and produce barytes and fluorspar domestically, one 
defaultof whom operates
default in a National Park.
default&#xa0;
default I am an active member of the CBI Minerals Group and also of the UK National Minerals Forum which 
defaultincludes central, devolved
default and 
defaultlocal government officials,
default planners, heritage groups and NGOs as well as industry representatives
default. 
default 
defaultI also belong to the Mining Association of the UK; and 
defaultam
default a member of two professional associations for 
defaultthe
default industry
default -
default IOM3 (Institute of Materials, Minera
defaultls and Mining) and IOQ (Institute of Quarrying). 
default 
defaultI am involved with the activities of
default Euromines
default and through them an EU Commission Expert Group the 
defaultRaw Materials Supply Group
default which includes industry, the Commission and member state representatives
default.
default&#xa0;defaultSubmission defaultWe have restricted our comments  to only the first of the
default questions  laid out in your  submission of evidence
default dated
default 3
defaultrd
default July
default 2013
default.
defaultWhat is the contribution to the UK economy of extractive industries in the UK? defaultThe UK has an active domestic industry producing 
defaultwell 
defaultover 200Mt of minerals annually in addition to o
defaultil and gas
default, and provide both employment and resource security
default. 
default 
default(Further detail is included in the submission by the CBI Minerals Group).
default 
defaultA high proportion of the tonnage is land-won aggregates for the construction industry, 
defaultand extracted material only tr
defaultavels short distances (under 30km average) to the next customer 
defaultmeeting local requirements and 
defaultwhich minimises environmental footprint and 
defaulttransportation
default - 
defaultand which meet
default 
defaultproximity
default 
defaultprinciples
default .  
defaultM
defaultany industrial minerals feed the wider economy  and key ind
defaultustries like the chemical, metals and electronics, high tech industries and the manufacturing sector more generally
default such as barytes,   fluorspar,
default 
defaultindustrial high-purity  limestone, metallurgical coke and silica sands.
defaultMinerals extraction is a rural industr
defaulty and individual companies live in and engage with the local community and all stakeholders. The level of restoration and aftercare is of high standards and generally over that required in the planning permission. BAA is part of the 
defaultNature After Minerals
default programme a partnership between Nat6ural England, RSPB and industry.
defaultThere is considerable potential for a higher level of extraction
default which provide
default a g
defaultreate
defaultr p
defaultroportion
default of national need and reduc
defaulte
default import dependence and potential future supply risk
default. 
defaultThis is fully endorsed in the Government’s  
defaultResource Security Action Plan
default of
default March 2012, paragraph 21.
defaultThis al
defaultso provides growth for both our
default sector and any manufacturing renaissance, and reduces the cost of purchasing materials from outside the UK and the sterling area . 
defaultThe EU recognised in 2008 the increasing need for indigeno
defaultus supply and to improve the 
defaultplanning 
defaultaccess to
default,
default and the investment potential for
default,
default domestic sourcing in their 
defaultRaw Material Initiative
default.
default This also identified specific strategic minerals t
defaulthat were at particular risk, 
defaultmany of which are geologically available in the UK and 
defaultwhich included fluor
defaultspar and barytes which are already extracted here.
defaultThe British Geological Survey (BGS) and Camborne School of Mines (Exeter University) have also highli
defaultghted similar 
defaultconcerns
default for UK supply
default and security
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultPeter Huxtable MA(Cantab), CEng, FIMMM, FIQ
defaultSecretary, British Aggregates Association
default&#xa0;
default10
defaultth
default September 2013
default&#xa0;
default