&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the BBFC [OLS 00013]default&#xa0;defaultExecutive Summarydefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultvoluntary self-regulation by the BBFC of Video-on-Demand (VOD) content applying granular age ratings and content advice; 
default&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultthe BBFC-run regulation of mobi
defaultle content, including websites, using a binary classification system based around the BBFC 18/R18 standard which enables the filtering of content and protection of minors; 
default&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultdevelopment by the BBFC and NICAM of a User Generated Content (UGC) ratings tool. 
default This self-regulatory questionnaire is tailored to reflect national differences and is designed to be completed by those uploading the content or the audience, allowing the use of online filters to prevent children accessing inappropriate content and the f
defaultacility to report abuse.  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default1.  Introductiondefault1.1
default defaultThe British Board of Film Classification (BBFC) is grateful for the opportunity to respond to the Culture
default,
default Media and Sport Committee Inquiry into Online Safety.  
default  default1.2 The BBFC is an independent, non-governme
defaultntal body which classifies films and videos distributed by way of packaged media and, increasingly, on the internet.  
defaultThe BBFC’s
default primary aim is to protect children and other vulnerable groups from harm through classification decisions which are legally enf
defaultorceable and to empower consumers, particularly parents and children, through content information and education.  
defaultThe BBFC will not classify material which is illegal in the UK, including content which promotes terrorism or which features indecent images o
defaultf children.
default  The BBFC became the independent regulator of content delivered by mobile networks in the UK from 2 September 2013.  The Director of the BBFC, David Cooke, sits on the Executive Board of UK Council for Child Internet Safety 
default(UKCCIS) 
defaultin recognit
defaultion of the BBFC’s role in the protection of children online. 
default1.3 The BBFC classifies films and videos/DVDs according to its Classification Guidelines, with ratings ranging from U for Universal to R18 which are restricted videos only allowed to be sold in 
defaultlicensed sex shops.  The BBFC’s Guidelines are the result of extensive public consultation 
defaultwith over 
default1
default0,000 people across the UK being consulted during the most recent Guidelines consultation
default in 2013
default.
default   Research demonstrates that the public agrees with the
default BBFC’s classification decisions 
defaultmost of the time.  92% of recent film viewers agreed with classification of films they had seen recently.
default (
defaultGoldstone Perl, 
defaultBernice Hardie 
default20
default13
default); and recognises and understands the BBFC’s symbols 89% of the time (rising to 9
default7% for parents) (
defaultTNS, 2007
default).   
default1.4  The BBFC also publishes (on its website and Apps) more detailed information, BBFCinsight, aimed primarily at parents, which outlines the key content issues in a film and thereby enables viewers to make fully educated vi
defaultewing decisions for themselves and their families. This information is available both when the content is distributed by way of packaged media and online. Independent research (
defaultSlesenger, 2009
default) suggests that 86% of parents of primary schoolchildren find th
defaultis information useful. 
default1.5  The BBFC runs an extensive education programme
default both online and through a series of seminars at the BBFC and throughout the country, with visits to schools and colleges, speaking to over 12,000 students in 2012 on media literacy
default and the classification process.   
defaultThe 
defaultBBFC further contributes to a number of media literacy initiatives run by 
defaultindustry and 
defaultchild protection groups
default, including Childnet UK,
default advising children and adults on how to keep themselves and their family safe
default onlin
defaulte.
default   
default2.   defaultThe defaultBBFCdefault and Home Entertainment Industry self-regulation onlinedefault2.1  For historical reasons, the current statutory regime for film and video/DVDs does not cover online content.  The Video Recordings Act was originally passed in 1984 before digital downloads of videos/DVDs.   
defaultHowever, media convergence is increasingly b
defaultlurring the distinction between physical and online material.  
default2.2  Independent research commissioned by the BBFC shows that while the public considers that the internet brings greater choice, freedom and flexibility, the majority of viewers still conside
defaultr it important to be able to check the suitability of audio-visual content they download.  85% of the public consider it important to have consistent BBFC classifications available for Video-On-Demand (VOD) content; rising to 90% of parents of children und
defaulter 16 (
defaultBernice Hardie, 2011
default).   
default2.3  In recognition of public demands for regulatory protection online,  the BBFC has worked in partnership with the home entertainment industry on a number of voluntary, self regulatory services which bring trusted BBFC cl
defaultassification standards and well known age ratings and symbols online.  BBFC digital services offers labelling and content advice services designed for content providers and platform owners (digital video services).   These services cover all forms of video
default-on-demand including subscription models (SVOD) and transactional (TVOD). 
default2.4  The BBFC has now rated 
defaultmore than
default 200,000 videos for online distribution by such companies as 
defaultWarner Bros, 
defaultWalt Disney, 20
defaultth
default Century Fox, Paramount, Universal, Sony; with BBFC r
defaultatings used by platforms such as iTunes, Netflix, Blinkbox/Tesco, Sainsbury’s, Dixons, BT Vision and Talk Talk. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe new industry initiative known as UltraViolet – which promotes the digital ownership of content – is also working with the BBFC.  Displaying
default BBFC labelling enables consumers to make informed choices when purchasing retail and rental digital video, thereby empowering parents to protect their children. 
default2.5  BBFC digital services include
default a ratings service aimed specifically at content 
defaultthat is on
defaultly available online and 
defaultthat would otherwise not be provided with a rating. This service – known as Watch and Rate – is becoming more popular and well-used.
default 
default Compared with the same period in 2012, there has been a 141% increase in industry take up as
default of 
default10
default September 2013.
default 
default3default.  
defaultOnline Pornographydefault3.1  It is generally accepted that exposing children to pornography is potentially harmful to them and is likely at the very least to impair their development.  This is why many countries, including the UK, have enacted measures to prevent children from ac
defaultcessing pornography.   
default3.2  In the UK, the BBFC classifies all pornographic content released both on video and theatrically.  The BBFC removes any material from pornographic works which is potentially harmful or otherwise illegal.  As well as policing the
default border between legal and illegal pornography, the BBFC polices the border between the strongest, hardcore pornography, and the less strong, softcore 
defaultpornography
default.  The BBFC classifies hardcore pornography as R18, which means that it may only be supplied th
defaultrough licensed sex shops, as an extra precaution against underage viewing.  
defaultHowever, the risk of children accessing even the strongest legal pornography is far greater online.  In addition, there are fewer effective controls on the distribution online of p
defaultornography which the BBFC would not classify at any 
defaultcategory.   
default3.3  Online pornography is an important example of where co or self-regulation has not worked well. While the majority of the home entertainment industry has chosen to opt for voluntary self 
defaultregulation, no members of the adult industry currently use the BBFC’s digital services.   
defaultThe market imperatives which in the UK have driven the mainstream home entertainment industry to adopt best practice self regulation, work in the opposite direction i
defaultn relation to adult content.  While 
defaultthe mainstream video industry recognises that 
defaultparents want the reassurance of trusted labels on online content, much of the adult industry wants to advertise its product as “uncensored”. 
default3.4  The BBFC removes any materi
defaultal from pornographic works it classifies which is potentially harmful
default or otherwise illegal under the VRA, including so-called “rape porn”.  The BBFC intervenes to remove from a pornographic work any portrayal of sexual activity which involves lack of conse
defaultnt, whether real or simulated.  The BBFC will also remove material, including dialogue, which is likely to encourage an interest in sexually abusive activity, including rape.  In short, "rape porn" does not exist in works classified by the BBFC.  But onlin
defaulte, where the VRA and its harm test do not apply, "rape porn" is available.   The BBFC believes that consideration needs to be given into how protections that are applied to physical R18 material can also be applied online if 
defaultmuch of 
defaultthe adult industry cont
defaultinues to refuse to participate in self-regulatory measures. 
default The BBFC therefore welcomes the Prime Minister’s declaration on 22 July 2013 that Government will ensure:
default“that videos streamed on line in the UK are subject to the same rules as those sold in shdefaultopsdefault.  Put simply – what you can’t get in a shop, you will no longer be able to get online.default” default3.5  The Government has recognised the dangers of extreme pornography and in 2008 made possession of extreme pornography an offence under the Criminal Justice and Immigration Act.  A BBFC classification is a defence against a prosecution under this Act the
defaultrefore purchasing a legally classified work is a protection against inadvertently possessing extreme pornographic material.  The BBFC regularly assists Local Government trading standards officers in ensuring that pornographic material has been classified b
defaulty the BBFC and restricted for sale to licensed sex shops.  However, these methods of enforcement are not available online.  
default3.6  While physical v
defaultideo works rated R18 by the BBFC may only be supplied to adults through licensed sex shops, restrictions to pr
defaultevent children accessing such material are not maintained online, except for UK services regulated by the Authority for Television On Demand (ATVOD).  These services form a very small proportion of the market, making it easier for those under 18 to access 
defaultpotentially harmful pornography.   In addition, ATVOD can only intervene and impose rules to require that the material must be made available in a manner which secures that children will not normally see or hear it, if a programme distributed online by a U
defaultK provider contains material which might 
defaultseriously i
defaultmpair the physical, mental or moral development of persons under the age of eighteen.  
default3.7  
default The 
defaultBBFC believes that there is a case to strengthen the definition of content online likely to seriously impa
defaultir the development of minor
defaults
default so that it is clear that hardcore pornography constitutes such content.  One option might be an amendment to the Audiovisual Media Services Directive so that explicit depictions of real sexual activity, or activity involving re
defaultalistic infliction of pain or injury, or real or simulated lack of consent to sexual activity, must be provided in such a manner which ensures that under 18s cannot 
defaultnormally see or hear it.  Such an approach would be consistent with that in the Government’
defaults paper: 
defaultConnectivity, Content and Consumers: Britain's digital platform for growth
default. 
default4.  defaultThe defaultBBFC and Mobile Networksdefault’default self-regulationdefault of online contentdefault4.1  From 2 September 2013, the BBFC became the independent regulator of content delivered via the UK’s four 
defaultmain 
defaultmobile networks (EE, O2, Three and Vodafone).
default&#xa0;
default  Under this new self regulatory system, the BBFC has created a 
defaultC
defaultlassification 
defaultF
defaultramework, based 
defaulton 
defaultthe
default trusted
default, transparent and consistent
default 
defaultstandards set out in its 
defaultClassification Guidelines, which 
defaultspecifies
default wh
defaultat
default content should be placed behind access controls/filters. 
default The Classification Framework is a living document which will be updated regularly 
defaultto reflect evolving public attitudes and societal concerns.
default4.2  The standards in the BBFC’s Classification Guidelines are used to ensure content which would be age rated 18 or R18 by the BBFC will be placed behind access controls and internet filters by 
defaultmobile operators to restrict access to that content by those under 18. This content includes pornography and other adult sexual content, pro-smoking and pro-Ana (anorexia nervosa) websites and content which promotes or glorifies discrimination
default, drug misuse
default or real life violence.  The BBFC and the mobile operators believe that this partnership will be trusted by the public, more transparent than the previous mobile regulatory regime and better able to adapt to changes in societal attitudes and concerns in re
defaultlation to child protection
default.
default4.3  The BBFC believes that child protection would be improved if those operating public WiFi services in places regularly visited by minors applied the same, consistent standards as those used by the mobile operators.  The BBFC
default would be able to offer assistance in setting and applying these standards, as it has done in partnership with the mobile operators for content accessed via mobile networks.   
default5.  User Generated Contentdefault onlinedefault5.1  The BBFC 
defaultwas
default a third party member of the
default EU
default’s
default CEO Coalition to make the Internet a better place for children.  In response to a call for action from the European Commission, members of the Coalition 
defaultin 2012/13 undertook
default to take positive action to make the Internet a better place for children in 
defaultthe European Union. The Coalition aim
defaulted
default to make the internet safer for children and the vulnerable through action in 
defaultfive
default core areas: simple and robust reporting tools, age-appropriate privacy settings, wider use of content classification, wider availabili
defaultty and use of parental controls and effective takedown of child abuse material. 
default5.2  In response to this initiative, the BBFC and 
defaultits
default counterpart, the Dutch regulator, the 
defaultNetherlands Institute for Classification of Audio Visual Media (
defaultNICAM) together dev
defaulteloped a tool for ordinary people to age rate User Generated Content (UGC) across different countries and platforms and according to recognised and trusted national standards.   UGC is growing in significance and needs to be addressed to allow parents the 
defaulttools to prevent children and the vulnerable from accessing inappropriate content.   
default5.3  The UGC tool, using a
default single, simple, free to complete questionnaire, instantaneously produces an age rating which can be shown on the video hosting platform
default and lin
defaultked to internet filters
default. The ratings differ from country to country to reflect different national concerns over content. For example, strong language is an issue for consumers in the UK but not in the Netherlands. 
default5.4  The tool is simple to use and unders
defaulttand. It contains six questions about the content of the UGC, on behaviour
default (including racism and other discriminatory behaviour, self harm and suicide)
default, 
defaultdrugs, horror, language, sex
default/nudity
default and violence. Completing the questionnaire takes 
defaultless
default than 
defaulttwo
default minu
defaulttes. It also includes a facility for viewers to report content which in their view 
defaultis abusive or even
default illegal
default, such as material intended to promote terrorism or child sex abuse images
default. 
default&#xa0;
default 
default5.5  The questionnaire is flexible
default.  It
default may be completed by those uploading content or it may be completed by those viewing the content. The ratings can then be linked to online filters. 
default&#xa0;
default This new initiative will shortly be trialled by Mediaset in Italy and the BBFC and NICAM are looking for t
defaultrial partners elsewhere across the EU.  This initiative could make the online world safer for children and has been welcomed by the EU Commission’s CEO Safer Internet Coalition and the UK Government.  
default5.6 
default 
defaultThe BBFC would be happy to demonstrate
default 
defaultto the Cul
defaultture
default,
default Media and Sport Committee how this tool could help to make the internet safer for children.  
default6.  Moderationdefault6.1 One core area that the BBFC believes could significant
defaultly improve child protection online 
defaultis effective moderation of sites that appeal to 
defaultchildren and teenagers.  The case of instances of inappropriate behaviour on the site 
defaultHabbo Hotel
default 
defaultand Ask.fm 
defaultdemonstrates the importance of robust moderation and effective follow up action if children are to be properly protected.  
default7.  Exemptions from thdefaulte Video Recordings Act and online music videosdefault7.1  When the Video Recordings Act (VRA) was passed over 25 years ago certain video works were made exempt from classification by the BBFC because they were considered unlikely to be harmful.  The threshold at
default which music, sport, documentaries and religious works lose their exemption from the VRA remains extremely high despite the content of these exempt works having changed beyond all recognition since 1984. This high threshold has meant that inappropriate and
default potentially harmful content in such works is exempt from statutory classification, allowing it to be legally supplied to children.  
default7.2 On 24 May 2013, 
defaultfollowing a consultation, 
defaultthe UK Government announced that it plans in 2014 to lower the exemptions th
defaultreshold for all currently exempt material in order to prevent children accessing potentially harmful material. 
default 
defaultOnce implemented, the decision will improve the protection children enjoy from potentially harmful media content by ensuring that video content 
defaultsuch as drug misuse, strong violence, racist language, and certain sexual content falling short of actual sex will no longer be legally able to be freely supplied to children. Instead, the BBFC will classify such content to keep it away from vulnerable and
default impressionable children.  
default7.3  However, t
defaulthere is particular concern about the content of currently exempt music videos and online music videos, highlighted among others by Reg Bailey in his review into the 
defaultc
defaultommercialisation and 
defaults
defaultexualisation of Children which resulted in the report 
defaultLetting Children be Children
default.  The Government’s proposed amendment to the VRA will only bring physical music videos within the BBFC’s regulatory ambit.  In the Department for Education’s Progress Report
default on the Bailey Review in May 2013, the Government stated:
default“On music videos, we want industry to develop solutions no later than the end of the year to ensure online videos - particularly those that are likely to be sought out by children and young people -default carry advice about their age-suitability and content.” default7.4  
defaultThe BBFC hopes to work with the recorded music industry towards the goal of achieving well understood and trusted age ratings and content advice for online music videos as we have done successfu
defaultlly with the home entertainment industry in relation to other online videos.  
defaultOne company – Universal Music – has begun to submit long form music video content to the BBFC for online age ratings.  
defaultA number of platforms which use BBFC 
defaultratings
default through BBFC D
defaultigital Services have indicated that they would carry music videos if they were age rated by the BBFC.  This would then mean that the ability to download these music videos 
defaultc
defaultould be controlled by age related filters which would be an important mechanism for
default child protection online. 
default8.  Conclusion:  the Appropriate Regulatory Environment to Protect Children Onlinedefault8.1  
defaultIn a 
defaultconverging media world, it is the content, and not the means of distribution, that is important when considering protection of children.
default   
defaultThe ecology of the internet is of course very different from that of the offline environment where harm risks are well understood and regulated for.   But online, the risk of harm, particularly to minors, from both legal and illegal material is at least
default as great and in some cases (for example access to legal pornography or pro-self harming and suicide content) arguably greater because of a much greater ease of access.  
default&#xa0;
default8.2  In several areas, industry and regulators have worked effectively together to r
defaulteduce the online harm risk.  The initiatives outlined in this response for example, which build on the BBFC’s partnerships with, among others, mobile operators, digital video services and content providers, and our cooperative relationships with fellow reg
defaultulators both in the UK and overseas, demonstrate this.   The public should continue to benefit from these initiatives.  Drawing on its experience and expertise, the BBFC stands ready to work further with Government, industry and other regulators to continu
defaulte collectively to improve child protection online.   
default&#xa0;
default8.
default3
default  The key criteria
default for any regulation
default should be clarity of approach and consumer and industry support.  The BBFC believes that the public policy priority should be to create an appropriate framework
default enabling both existing and future effective self, co and statutory regulation to flourish, empowering consumers to inform and protect themselves and their families.   
default&#xa0;
default8.4  
defaultIn the BBFC’s experience the key factors for the success of an online regulatory system are: 
default8.
default6 
default The BBFC’s own self-regulatory solutions fulfil these criter
defaultia and have widespread industry and public support.  
defaultWe would encourage Government to continue to encourage and support these, and other, solutions.  
defaultHowever, as is clear from our evidence, there are some obvious areas where 
defaultmore robust 
defaultGovernment interven
defaulttion 
defaultis required to ensure proper protection of children online
default, for example online pornography, where currently lack of industry self-regulation is leading to children being able to access inappropriate and potentially harmful content.  
defaultEqually, industry 
defaultcould do more, for example through effective moderation, to ensure that their service is safe for children and the vulnerable online.  
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default