&#xa0;
defaultCatholic Education Service – Written evidencedefault&#xa0;
defaultThe Catholic Education Service (“CES”) is the education agency of the Catholic Bishops Conference of England and Wales (“Bishops’ Conference”). The Bishops Conference is the permanent assembly of all the Catholic Bishops throughout the two countries and the CES, as an agency of the Bishops’ Conference, is charged with promoting and securing education on behalf of the Bishops throughout those two countries. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe CES is aware that the Government is seeking to reduce regulation and bureaucracy. It is noted that the Bill contains a broad range of measures intended to reduce the burden of regulation across many areas. Many of the provisions of the Bill are concerned with specific areas of activity beyond education about which we are unable to comment. We are therefore limiting our observations to matters of concern as they relate to education. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhilst we understand the importance of removing regulation that is obsolete, it is important to ensure that any repeal or revocation of legislative provisions on that basis is in fact dealing with removal of provisions which are no longer required. In this regard we note that Schedule 13 paragraph 5 (3) and (4) provide for the omission of sections 32, 33 and 34 of the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 (“FHEA”. These sections concern the transfer of property, rights and liability to FE corporations and designated institutions. The Explanatory Memorandum explains that these, and other, provisions are being repealed since they concern the initial incorporation of FE corporations which are now considered to be obsolete. Section 28 of the FHEA, which provides for designation of institutions for the purposes of further or higher 
defaulteducation
default, does however remain in force.  It is therefore possible that new institutions, to which Sections 32, 33 and 34 would apply, will be established by virtue of designation under Section 28. We are therefore of the view that whilst Section 28 remains in force the provisions which flow from it should also remain in force. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOn a more general note, whilst we understand the Government’s drive to remove unnecessary legislative provision we do have some concerns in relation to the power to 
defaultdis
default-apply legislation which is no longer of practical use. What is “no longer of practical use” may well be a matter of opinion. There would need to be very clear guidance as to what this term means. In addition we would suggest that wide consultation will be required. Section 54 of the Bill requires consultation with law commissions and other persons that the Minister considers appropriate. Repeal of legislation may have far reaching impact on particular sectors of the system and therefore full public consultation should in our view be required. The provisions in the Bill in this regard are not in our view wide enough. 
default&#xa0;
defaultChristine Fischer
default, 
defaultAssistant Director and Legal Adviser           
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default