&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by David Fogarty (CLC0062)defaultThe following is a submission to the UK Parliament
default’s Select Committee on “
defaultClimate: public understanding and its policy implications
default”. I am writing this in my personal capacity as 
defaulta 
defaultspecialist science and e
defaultnvironment writer. I was the 
defaultclimate change correspondent for Thomson Reuters 
defaultin Asia 
default(2008-13) and 
defaultI’m 
defaultnow a media consultant and writer fo
defaultcusing on environmental issues. I started writing about climate change in the late 1980s.
default The following 
defaultcomments are for the public record.
defaultSummary
defaultQ: 
defaultAre there particular difficulties when reporting
default complex science areas such as 
defaultclimate science? 
defaultA specialist climate science/climate change reporter 
defaultshould have no more difficulty 
defaultcovering their beat than other specialist correspondents. 
defaultClima
defaultte science is complex but no more so than, f
defaultor instance, mergers and acquisitions, specialist criminal or business law 
defaultor international trade. Reporters 
defaultshould have a background that allows them to understand the technical details of the main issues
default of the
defaultir beat; 
defaultbe able to quickly distinguish what is new and therefore news and what isn’t
default; 
defaulthave credible contacts 
defaultwho can 
defaultoffer insight on developments
default and offer contrasting opinions to help readers better understand any key developments.
default 
defaultWhat makes climate stories interesting and publishable?
defaultQ: Has there been a loss of scientific and environmental expertise in newspapers and news agencies? What has been the impact of this for the coverage of c
defaultlimate science?
default&#xa0;
defaultQ: Has there be
defaulten a change in climate science 
defaultand policy news coverage in the UK recent years? If so why do you thi
defaultnk this is?
default 
default How effective is the press in the UK at distinguishing legitimate concerns about climate and energy policies and less accurate criticisms of the science?
defaultQ: Do you have
default a vi
defaultew on the reasons James Painter
default found in his research that the UK and US press represent 80% of sceptical voices in the countries he included in his study?
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default