&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultGwendadefault Ward [WAS0006]default&#xa0;
defaultWomen's disadvantage in sport is a huge topic crossing into many different areas.  I would like to contribute to one, 
default“reasons why participation by women decreases.”  Again this is a very wide topic and issues will vary from sport to sport – around some 
defaultglobal themes which also link into the other topic areas, especially funding, 
defaultmedia and PE.
default&#xa0;
defaultAnna 
defaultKessel's
default recent piece on the difficulties faced by female coaches (Culture of sexism blamed for lack of top-level female coaches in UK; Guardian,  Sept 5
defaultth
default 13
default) could have been written in 1991 when I was asked, as a volunteer, to set up the Women's Advisory Group by the then British Athletics Federation. The group did some excellent work, but disbanded in 1995 due to our recommendations being ignored and there h
defaultas been no discernible progress since in making athletics a more “friendly”
default environment for women and girls.
default&#xa0;
defaultFemale under-represented in decision-making has got worse since 1991 and the issues for women in coaching have remained the same.  This means that
default there is still no voice on gender in strategy - 
defaultwhere the needs and priorities for developing the sport come from the traditional “by men for men” perspective, but which is actually seen as a norm rather than a gendered view.  So, there is no guidance fo
defaultr clubs, coaches and parents on keeping mid to late teen girls in the sport and little or no organisational recognition of the social pressures on girls and the detailed effects of their different maturational rates – although obviously individual coaches 
defaultknow this very well, but are left to re-invent the wheel and cope individually.    There has been extensive work on prevention and action on eating disorders in endurance running but little of it is visible or been incorporated in practice. There is no cha
defaultllenge to casual sexism among professionals and volunteers, there is no recognition of inherent gender bias in voting systems for regional and national councils, there is no recognition of women's differing career patterns and therefore no strategy to acti
defaultvely recruit women into volunteering at an appropriate time, and, most crucially of all, there is no challenge to professional recruitment practices that favour male candidates, or to the bullying and excluding culture of the governing bodies which now, as
default opposed to the nineties -  makes challenge impossible.  
default&#xa0;
defaultIf athletics is ever to get the baton round safely on gender equity it needs to acknowledge that its governing bodies, like any organisation dominated by an unrepresentative power group which unwit
defaulttingly or carelessly perpetuates a culture and procedures which reflect the needs of those in power and which make the contributions of other groups – women or ethnic minorities for example – seem deficient. Those male dominated cultures are endemic in spo
defaultrt, and difficult to change. UKA's over reliance on voluntary coaches at all levels other than the super-elite
default,  exacerbates
default the problem, but it is crucial too that UKA and England Athletics address their organisational biases. They have recruited many ove
defaultrseas coaches – all male – and appointed very highly paid executives – again all male – who have no experience or interest in handling pressing diversity issues in a complex organisation. Organisation gender bias is masked by the resulting actual imbalance
default in numbers – for example in coaching at levels 3 and 4.  So, as the Peter Stanley (UK Athletics' new head of coaching development) quote in 
defaultKessel's
default piece confirms, they are free to keep doing it their way and blaming gender imbalance on female inexperien
defaultce – and UK Sport keeps allowing them to do it. Meanwhile some excellent women coaches at Levels 3 and 4 have been left sidelined and undervalued.  If athletics had simply taken a hard look at its recruitment procedures for gender bias in 1991, the dearth 
defaultof women in coaching and decision making - and the massive loss of able teenage girls from the sport, might have been largely solved by now. They need to be forced to do this now, 
defaultand to change athletics from a sport that casually accepts the disadvantage
default of women and minority groups, into an organisation that actively promotes and manages for balance and diversity.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultGwenda
default Ward
defaultEx Olympic athlete.
default  
defaultEx PE Teacher.
default  
defaultFirst honorary secretary to Women's Advisory Group for Athletics (then BAF) 1991.
default  
defaultSat on 
defaultIAAF Women's Committee 2004 – 7.
default  
defaultChair, UKA Valuing Diversity Gender 
defaultsub committee
default 2003
default-
default7.
default  
defaultWrote “Coaching Women and Girls Module for then UKA coach education programme.
default   
defaultWriter and campaigned on gender issues and sport.
default  L 2 athletics coach.  
defaultCurren
defaulttly studying for 
defaultM.Sc
default in Emotional Well-being and Sport, University of Cumbria.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default