&#xa0;
defaultWritten submission from defaultthe Association of Play Industriesdefault (LPG 62)default1.0default              defaultOrganisation submitting evidencedefault1.1 
default              
defaultWritten evidence is submitted by Deborah Holt, Association Manager, 
defaultAssociation of Play Industr
defaulties (API), Federation House, Stoneleigh Park, Warwickshire CV8 2RF. Tel: 024 7641 4999, Fax: 024 7641 4990, E
defaultmail
default:
default 
defaultapi@api-play.org
defaultThe 
defaultAssociation of Play Industries (API)
default&#xa0;
defaultis the lead trade body within the play sector, representing the interests of the manufacturers, installers, designers and distributors of both outdoor and indoor play equipment and safe
defaultty
default surfacin
defaultg.  
defaultwww.api-play.org
default&#xa0;
default2.0 default              defaultExecutive summarydefault2.1
default              
defaultThe submission makes the following key points:
default&#xa0;default3.0 default              defaultBrief introductiondefault&#xa0;
default3.1
default              
defaultThe 
defaultAssociation of Play Industries (API)
default&#xa0;
defaultis the lead trade body within the play sector, representing the interests of the manufacturers, installers, designers and distributors of both outdoor and indoor play equipment and safe
defaultty
default surfacin
defaultg.  The API was founded in 1984 and currently has 75 members. 
defaultThe API Chair is Michael Hoenigmann, Managing Director of Proludic Ltd.
default&#xa0;
defaultwww.api-play.org
default3.2
default              
defaultThe API operates under the umbrella of the Federation of Sports and Play Associations (FSPA), the national trade body responsible for representing 18 Associations in the UK’s sport and play industries.
default  
defaultwww.sportsandplay.com
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3.3
default              
defaultAPI members build 
default4000 playgrounds
default and play 
defaultspace
defaults annually and 
defaultbid 
defaultfor hundreds of local authority contracts every year
default.  A
defaultccording 
defaultto its membership, 
defaultpoor practice 
defaultin local authority playground procurement 
defaultis rif
defaulte.  As a result, the API believes that c
defaulturrent 
defaultpublic sector 
defaultprocurement practice 
defaultis failing to 
defaultdeliver valu
defaulte for money to the public purse.  This is the reason the API is submitting evidence.   
default  
default&#xa0;
default4.0default              defaultFactual informationdefault4.1
default              
defaultAPI 
defaultmembers 
defaultreport that they are 
defaultspend
defaulting
default increasingly more time on long, drawn-out tenders that are
default no
defaultt fit for purpose
default.  P
defaultlay
default spaces and play
defaultgrounds are
default no
defaultt commodities like paper clips
default – they are 
defaultdesigned by 
defaulte
defaultxperts and should be bespoke according to locality, the communities they serve, and the outcomes delivered to children.  Yet time after time, the 
defaultprocurement 
defaultprocess is reduced to over-simplistic box-ticking.  Tighter, more streamlined practices would reduce costs for local aut
defaulthorities and contractors alike.
default&#xa0;
default4.2
default              
defaultAPI members regularly report tenders 
defaultinviting
default submissions from over ten contractors.  While competition is healthy, the value for money represented is
default not c
defaultlear.  One recent County Council tender for basic outdoor play equipment invited eight contractors to apply, each required to complete seven separate submission documents. 
default4.3
default              
defaultThis is 
defaultjust one example of a local authority going through a procurement process for the sake of going through the process.  The 
defaultnotion 
defaultthat inviting large numbers of contractors to bid for work delivers value for money is 
defaultfalse
default.  The resources used by 
defaultplay 
defaultcontractors on these wasteful processes would be better spent developing the next generation of innovative play equipment, particularly 
defaultat a time when 
defaultbarriers to 
defaultactive 
defaultplay are rising.  No tender should invite more than three bidders to take part, then those taking part can focus on delivering the very best submission possible with ge
defaultnuine value for money built in.
default4.4
default              
defaultThe API argues that this 
defaultflawed procurement culture 
defaultactually 
defaultdevalues play
default by encouraging
default less reputable companies to take part.  
defaultWhile p
defaultroducts on a drawing can look alike
default, 
defaultcut-price operators cut corners on quality, standards
default, materials and safety 
defaultto deliver cheaper deals.  
defaultThe rationale 
defaultfor the original tender – the 
defaultprovision of 
defaulthigh quality play spaces that meet local need - is 
defaultthen 
defaultobscured.  
default4.5
default              
defaultThe API believes that 
defaultplayground procurement
default tenders should:
default4.6
default              
defaultOne 
defaultgrey area of playground procurement is the role of children.  
defaultThe API 
defaultwholeheartedly support
defaults
default their involvement from the earliest stages
default but believes that the 
defaultdelegati
defaulto
defaultn 
defaultof 
defaultthe role of 
defaultultimate 
defaultdecision-maker to children is an abdication of responsibility and accountability
default by local authorities
default.  
defaultAsking 
defaultchild
defaultren
default what they want in a 
defaultplayground will usually result in them choosing a 
defaultswing, slide and roundabout
default because those are the pieces of play equipment that tend to come to mind instantly and that they are likely to be using currently.  By asking children what kind of 
defaultexperiences
default 
defaultthey would like to have 
defaultin a playground, they will give a quite different and more imaginative 
defaultresponse. 
default4.7
default              
defaultThe API is currently sourcing examples of local authority playground procurement best practice, sourced from amongst its membership.  The Association will be happy to share these findings with the Committee.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default