&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Cumbria County Council Integrated Transport Team (TIC 106)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultHow do Government and local authorities identify demand for passenger transport in defaultisolated communities (including rural and urban areas and island communities)?default&#xa0;
defaultGiven the rural nature of the County and the hi
defaultgh distances that people travel
default to access services in the Key Service Centres
default, 
defaultCumbria County Council has difficulty in meeti
defaultng t
defaulthe travel needs of all its 
defaultresidents.  The County Council is required to allocate funding to provide home to school, special needs and transport for social care clients.  In addition there is support for bus services where these are not provided commercial
defaultly and for community transport
default to provide options when conventional services are not available
default.  Following work that was done using the Accession model to identify areas where there was not good access to scheduled bus services
default,
default it was agreed that it would
default be helpful to define a level of service that could be sustained by the Council particularly with regard to meeting the needs of more remote communities.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis review looked at 790 communities across the County and mapped the available transport provision,
default where essential services (eg doctors, schools) were si
defaultt
defaultuated and where people needed to travel for various purposes.  The aim was to provide a transport network which took into account both bus and rail services (the County 
defaulthas
default a good rail network).  This
default led to the Council having agreed criteria for the support of scheduled bus services when they were not provided 
defaultcommercially
default.  Over 90% of bus services in 
defaultCumbria
default are provided commercially in the main by Stagecoach.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe criteria are still applied and 
defaulttake account of the likely sustainability of bus services where there a few people likely to travel.  In some cases where need is identified funding can sometimes be provided on a short term basis to determine whether there is a likelihood that a scheduled
default bus services will be viable on a longer term basis.  Whilst it is recognised that there may be a need for continued support a value for money criteria is applied as any bus service supported by the County Council needs to have a
defaultn agreed
default ratio of fares col
defaultlected to cost.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe County Council is not aware how central government identifies demand for passenger transport.  They will 
defaulthowever 
defaulthave information on numbers travelling on concessionary bus passes as regular reports are 
defaultprovided by Cumbria County Counc
defaultil to the 
defaultDepartment for Transport.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultTo what extend are the needs of different groups of passengers (e.g. people with disabilities, older people, young people) taken into account in determining the provision of public transport to isolated communities?default&#xa0;
defaultI
defaultn determining the provision to more isolated communities the County Council has over many years developed a range of solutions.  Where scheduled bus services are unlikely to be sustainable even with considerable financial support the transport provision is
default primarily demand-responsive.  There is an extensive network of Voluntary Car Schemes which are coordinated locally by volunteer coordinators.  In order to supplement the provision of transport for volunteers the County Council provides the 
default“
defaultRural Wheels
default”
default 
defaultservice which utilises the down time of small commercial providers.  Any
defaultone
default over the age of 16 is eligible provided they do not have 
defaulta scheduled bus service.  
defaultManagement information regarding this 
defaultservice assist
defaults
default the County Council in providing evidence re
defaultgarding patterns of travel from isolated communities.   Transport can be tailored to accommodate differing passenger needs 
defaultwithin the agreed framework 
defaultbut passengers
default are required
default to be as flexible as possible
default regarding travel times, and occasionally days o
defaultf the week
default to ensure
default the
default transport resource is utilised as efficiently as possible.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWhat are the main challenges associated with providing better and more consistent bus and rail services to isolated communities? How can these challenged be overcome?default&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaulte availability of funding to 
defaultprovide additional 
defaultimprovements to bus services is the largest challenge as there is not sufficient demand to either run or enhance services without subsidy.  De-regulation of the transport network has resulted in commercial op
defaulterators selecting the most profitable routes which tend to be in the more urban or densely populated areas leaving isolated communities to look to the local authority to meet their transport needs.  In addition where additional housing has been built in ur
defaultban
default areas
default the nature of these developments do not always consider the needs of operators to 
defaultbe able to serve the areas by 
defaultbus.  The County Council works where possible with District and Borough Councils as well as developers to encourage sustainable 
defaulttransport
default through the Travel Planning process
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe County Council’s aim is to integrate transport services that are statutorily required and contracts packages of work to link Home to School or Adult Social Care transport with supported scheduled bus serv
defaultices. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIncreasingly the travel needs in the county 
defaulthave 
defaultbecome more diverse as people travel in 
defaultmany 
defaultdifferent directions to work and services
default 
defaultrather than along the traditional 
defaultroutes
default to th
defaulte employment in the nearest Key Service Centre
default.
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultThe County Council became responsible two years ago for administering the English National Concessionary Travel Scheme.  In 
defaultCumbria
default there is a high proportion of use by concessionaires of scheduled bus services.  On the commercial services on average aroun
defaultd 38% of passengers
default are concessionary.  O
defaultn some routes many of these in rural areas the proportion is much higher.  The Council had challenges during the first year to provide adequate funding to reimburse bus operators.  Consequently a decision was taken 
defaultto reduce the reimbursement rate paid to operators from 65% to 58%.  In response to this the main operator (Stagecoach) increased their bus fares to people who travel without conces
defaultsions.  Unfortunately this lead
default to a decrease in people using buses and pay
defaulting fares.
default 
defaultIn addition there is a high proportion of tourist travel in Cumbria
default particularly in South Lakeland which adds 
defaulta 
defaultsignificant pressure to the budget
default. 
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultRecently there has also been a reduction in the amount of BSOG that transport operators have 
defaultbeen able to claim and the County Council has been advised by Stagecoach that the reduction in the amount of money available together with other factors including the increasing cost of fuel has made some bus services less viable.
default&#xa0;
defaultAccess to Health, both G
defaultP and hospital appointments is becoming increasingly challenging.  This is due to a number of factors including the change in eligibility criteria for free patient transport, increased patient choice around where consultations can be made and increased ava
defaultilability of appointment times early in the morning, later in the evening and at weekends.   Cumbria County Council continues to engage with “health” to try and address transport issues from a strategic perspective. Whilst there has been some success, this
default work has not been made any easier by the continued changes in Health 
defaultgovernance structures 
defaultthrough the transition 
defaultfrom the PCT to Clinical Commissioning Groups.  The provision of transport for patients in Cumbria is currently the responsibility of North W
defaultest Ambulance Services on contract to the CCG’s.  The County Council has also tried to engage with NWAS to have a collaborative approach to providing transport without success.
default&#xa0;
defaultHow effectively do Community Transport services address the needs of passengerdefault in isolated communities? How could Community Transport be improved?default&#xa0;defaultThe County Council’s definition of Commun
defaultity Transport is not restricted
default to Voluntary Social Cars and Community Minibus schemes run under either Section 22 or Section 19 Permits.  It als
defaulto includes demand-responsive transport provided by Commercial Transport Operators under the umbrella of 
defaultits 
defaultRural Wheels Scheme.  The Rural Wheels scheme provides a flexible transport service which only receives financial support when it operates.  This is
default cost effective from the Council’s perspective when compared with the relatively high cost of supporting bus services particularly in more remote rural areas where there are few people travelling.  
defaultThe County Council is only able
default to support the statutory c
defaultoncessionary travel scheme so concessions are only available on scheduled bus services.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe provision of Community Transport other than the Rural Wheels type services relies heavily on volunteers which are easier to recruit in some parts of the county tha
defaultn in others.   The volunteers are required
default to both drive
default and 
defaultcoordinate requests within
default schemes.  Experience has shown when community transport schemes have started to pay staff they have soon become unviable. The development of the Rural Wheels scheme acr
defaultoss the County has meant that the Council facilitates/supports transport in all areas irrespective of the availability of volunteers.  The development and ongoing support of Community Transport requires both financial and staffing suppor
defaultt to achieve the be
defaultst results.  
defaultIn this respect the County Council works closely with communities to develop schemes.
default&#xa0;defaultFurther flexibility in the S19 permit legislation could improve community transport. Such transport schemes can presently only be used by members of the sch
defaulteme and are not available to the “general public” which prevents use by tourists and visitors. 
defaultThe County Council is developing a new community transport solution “Community Wheels” which will deliver demand-
defaultresponsive
default transport using fully accessible comm
defaultunity minibuses in partnership with local communities.  The viability of such services could be increased if visitors were able to have some sort of temporary membership that would allow them to pay to use the service. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOpening out membership could increa
defaultse the patronage and therefore viability of some type of community minibus schemes.   However, this could cause
default tensions
default with the small commercial provider taxi who would normally provide transport where scheduled bus services or other transport was not av
defaultailable.  The County Council relies heavily on the availability of a large number of small operators to provide transport for children with special needs and social care clients.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultTo what extent should passengers in isolated communities be expected to reldefaulty on taxis and other demand-responsive transport services?default&#xa0;defaultWhere scheduled services are not available either commercially or the Council is unable to support these services taxis and demand-responsive transport services provide a flexible 
defaultsolution which is likely to be more appropriate for the user if it is door-to-door.   The County Council’s view is that the issue is less likely to be around whether the service is a bus, taxi or 
defaultminibus, it is more likely to be because people will have to
default pay for any alternative to scheduled bus services and also that users will need to pre-book the transport.  
default&#xa0;defaultWhilst there is an argument that these services are not comparable to scheduled bus services the Council is clear that there needs to be options 
defaultfor people to travel where these services are not financially sustainable.
default This does enable all residents in Cumbria to travel for essential services however there are difficulties in providing transport for employment.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat are the main challenges associdefaultated with funding transport services in isolated commudefaultnities? How can these services defaultbe made more affordable?default&#xa0;defaultThe need for ongoing revenue funding at a time when the County Council has a number of pressures in maintaining a range of services including transport, the Council had to take the decision three years ago to withdraw support for some 19 bus services.  The
defaultse services required considerable subsidy to maintain and in some cases alternatives have been found.  The 
defaultlevel 
defaultof bus fares in parts of the County are an issue and this is largely due to the cost of providing services and the distances travelled.  In add
defaultition this situation has not been improved by the availability of ENCTS as operators do not 
defaultreceive
default full fare reimbursed.  The County Council has in the region of 96,000 residents who have concessionary travel passes and in addition a number of tourists tr
defaultavelling in the County who are eligible for “free” transport.”
default&#xa0;
defaultThe County has an ageing population and given the current policy to enable people remain in their own homes for as long as possible this will continue to add demand for transport services and 
defaultconsequent financial pressure to transport budgets.  
default&#xa0;
defaultServices can be made more affordable through efficient planning and coordination of transport requests to make sure that people living in the same area travel at a similar time.  This should generate a
defaultdditional income and reduce the net cost of transport. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA more affordable and efficient transport network could be developed through further integration of services.  This would require flexibility to allow some types of service to carry the “general publ
defaultic” for example, non-emergency patient transport being linked with social care transport or to improve access to the local GP. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTransport services could be means tested so that only those in receipt of certain benefits receive a subsidised transport servi
defaultce.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default This was formally approved by the County Council in 2006
default