&#xa0;
defaultThe Code should be enshrined in legislation and now adopted at a minimum of level 4 with a transition period to 6 over a short time frame. If we are about to have a housing building boom, houses should be future proofed to ensure that running costs are minimised and fuel poverty is averted.
defaultThe Local Planning Authority (Babergh District Council) policy on the affordable housing element of any substantive development is a minimum requirement of 35%. In this case and based on the argument of financial hardship by the developer, under half the number of homes under this formula
default was agreed – 8 instead of 17. Moreover, the development is only being built to Level 3 of the Code for Sustainable Homes, whereas our local housing association builds to a minimum of Code level 4. There was no condition attached to the consent in this regard.
defaultThe Transition Lavenham small energy group is studying a house system design which, if built to high insulation standards, will virtually make it self-sufficient in energy. It takes advantage of the availability of LED lighting, which uses only 11% of the wattage required by corresponding filament bulbs and deep cycle batteries to make better use of solar PV. Solar PV panels produce 30 volts dc, ideal for charging 24 volt dc batteries. The batteries are charged during daylight hours and can in non-daylight hours provide 12 volt or 24 volt dc LED lighting or 24 volt dc fridges and freezers as well as maintain a supply to computers. Or, through the inverter, the batteries can supply 240 volt ac services, including LED lighting in non-daylight hours, 
defaultWe believe that all new homes should now take advantage of this technology, especially affordable housing, so that the occupants can afford to live in them. 
defaultMany consumers will be unable to pay for their energy supplies. Those able to raise the capital will install saving measures, but the fuel poor will be unable to pay their fuel bills. Affordable housing should be affordable to live in.
defaultWe commend the above to the Environmental Audit Committee.
defaultMembers of Transition Lavenham are willing to provide oral evidence in support of the above.
default14 September 2013default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default