&#xa0;
defaultJennifer Wedgwood – Written evidencedefault&#xa0;
defaultI am writing to request that 
defaultyou :
default-classify as restricted byways all unsealed unclassified roads (UUCRs) (ie green lanes)default·downgrade all existing unsealed Byways Open to All Traffic (BOATs) to restricted byway statusdefault·provide rights of appeal against refusals by highway authorities to make Traffic Regulation Orders excluding motor vehicles from unsurfaced lanes.defaultMy views on the effects of off- roading on green lanes have been formed over the past 20 years mainly in relationship to the Peak District National Park. When we first arrived with our small children lanes like ‘The Long Causeway’ were part of our usual set of walks. The access to Stanage Edge, the frogspawn in the drainage ditches, the bird song and beautiful views made it a perfect route for a family walk. Unfortunately, we have had to give up using Long Causeway because it is now unsafe and unpleasant to walk on. My husband and I also run for exercise and we have had to give up any routes which involve the Causeway. I fell and injured myself quite badly (twice) about three years ago and have not been back since. Well, not until the recent collapses 
defaultwhich caused its emergency closure.
default It is in a very poor condition- badly eroded both on the track and for some distance either side- and would not be safe for running or horses as it is now. But I have walked along it several times since its closure and, at least, the magical atmosphere is back. The fresh air and the quiet of this glorious piece of countryside is a priceless asset.
defaultUnfortunately, even during the short closure (designed to prevent further collapse which would see the route closed for good) off-roaders continued to use the route travelling across a SSSI to avoid barriers, pushing barriers over and winching concrete and steel posts out of the ground in order to drive onto the closed lane.
defaultIn my experience:
defaultA small minority group are threatening the environment, amenity value and lawful activity of the majority with little regard for the future of our precious countryside. Please take action now to safeguard our green lanes.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013.
default&#xa0;
default