&#xa0;
defaultDr P D defaultWadeydefault – Written evidencedefaultINTRODUCTION
default1.  I am making this submission as an individual interested in the rights of way aspects of the Draft Deregulation Bill published as Cm 8642 in July 2013 [1].  
defaultBACKGROUND AND EXPERIENCE
default2.  I first became involved in rights of way matters in the early 1980s when a path I used to ride after school became the subject of an application to be removed from the definitive map and another that was ridden frequently was advertised as being the subject of a modification order to record it as a footpath rather than a bridleway.
default3.  My first application to record a path resulted in bridleway 
defaultShenley
default 35 being added to the definitive map in 1992.  This went through unopposed, and I found quickly that there were many other routes that riders were using every day or every week that were not shown on the definitive map and statement for the area.  Accordingly, I set about collecting evidence to ensure routes used by riders and carriage drivers were recorded.   I now have 123 applications 
defaultawaiting
default processing by the relevant surveying authority.  In addition 71 highways are recorded on the definitive map and statement following my application or my intervention.  I have been a trustee of two of the statutory 
defaultconsultees
default on rights of way matters, and last year wrote a book 
defaultRights of Way: Restoring the Record
default, [2] (jointly with Sarah Bucks), which sets out in easy to follow terms how to find relevant evidence in The National Archives, the British Library and county record offices, and how to put a modification order application together in a way that is helpful for the surveying authority to assess.
defaultOVERALL VIEW OF THE RIGHTS OF WAY ASPECTS OF THE DRAFT BILL
default4.  I confine my comments to clauses 12 to 18 and Schedule 6 of the Draft Bill 
default5.  The rights of way aspects of the Draft Bill appear to be closely aligned to the agreement [3] reached by the Stakeholder Working Group formed to try to find a way forward on rights of way issues that would command the support of the highway users and campaigners, the local authorities who have to implement highway recording functions, and the landowners over whose subsoil the highways run.
default6.  The fact that the Stakeholder Working Group was able to come to a consensus view at all means that the various provisions are finely balanced.  In order to retain majority support for the package, it is therefore vital that there is no cherry picking of some provisions of the report over others.  This means that all of the Group’s proposals need to be implemented together.
default7.  
defaultSchedule 6 defaultparadefault default6(default2default)default.   In my reading of the Draft Bill, 
defaultI find one aspect that was not reported in the Group’s recommendationsdefault.  That is, the proposed change to section 53 Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 set out in Schedule 6 paragraph 2.  The change in test for making an order from ‘reasonably alleged to subsist’ to ‘subsists’ changes the level of proof required at the modification order application stage, and so could not be said to be deregulatory.  It would set the bar much higher than it is at present, and as a result many would-be applications might not be made (for example, by people who mistakenly think they haven’t enough evidence).  This would have the effect of stopping up many unrecorded highways.  It was not consulted upon prior to the publication of the draft Bill, and I do not believe it carries the consensus of the rights of way users, practitioners and sub-soil owners.
default8.  
defaultSchedule 6 defaultparadefault 6(4)default.   I am concerned that some surveying authorities will regard the prospect of being taken to the magistrates’ court for failure to conduct the preliminary review of a new 
defaultmodification order application within 3 months as nothing to worry about.  Most members of the public would be highly daunted at the prospect of taking a local authority to court.  
defaultThe use of the courts rather than an administrative process in this situation is not deregulatory in naturedefault.  It would be far better if the Secretary of State could fine authorities that fail to take the required action.  A system of automatic penalty payments for authorities that fail to devote adequate resources to the task would allow them to budget better, and so decide which the better occurs of action is: a daily penalty payment or allocation some staff to the task.  Unless every surveying authority takes its role seriously in the next 13 years, many unrecorded highways will cease to exist on the cut off day.
default9.  
defaultSchedule 6 defaultparadefault 6(8)default.   While I agree with the aim behind the proposed addition of 
defaultpara
default 3A to 
defaultSch
default 14 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981, I am concerned that some surveying authorities will abuse the power given in 
defaultpara
default 3A(3) not to submit matters to the Secretary of State if they feel the grounds of appeal are insufficient.  It must be a fundamental principle of law that no person can be judge in a case involving 
defaulthimself
default, yet that is precisely the situation that this sub-paragraph would create.  It would be better if the authority had to submit the appeal, but, if no grounds are found, the Secretary of State (or more likely an Inspector acting on his behalf) dismissed the case without further ado.  
defaultCONCLUDING REMARKS
default10.  I trust that the Committee will find these comments helpful in considering the Draft Bill’s contents.  I would urge the Committee to attempt to retain the principle of adopting the whole of the Stakeholder Working Group’s recommendations as without taking them as a block, there will be much division in the rights of way practitioners, users and sub-soil owners’ world.
default11.  I have highlighted one area where the Draft Bill seeks to implement a change that was not identified by the Group (my paragraph 6 above), one where the proposed means of implementing the Group’s proposals is not deregulatory (but where it could be made so, my paragraph 7), and one where the Draft Bill purports to violate one of the laws of natural justice, where again a mechanism exists for modifying the law in a deregulatory manner to achieve the Group’s proposal (my paragraph 8).
default12.  I would be pleased to give further comment on the Draft Bill if invited to do so.
defaultDr P D 
defaultWadey
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
defaultReferences
default[1] Cm 8642, July 2013, Draft Deregulation Bill.
default[2] 
defaultRights of Way: Restoring the Record
default, Oct 2012, Bucks, S. &amp; 
defaultWadey
default, P., 
defaultISBN 978-0-9574036-0-4
default[3] NECR035, 
defaultStepping Forward
default, 
defaultThe
default Stakeholder Working Group on Unrecorded Public Rights of Way: Report to Natural England, March 2010.
default&#xa0;
default