&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Institute for Government, default[ODdefault1default7]defaultThis submission sets out the Institute for Government’s response to some of the questions raised in your Issues and Questions Paper. We draw on our experience of using government data across our programme of work, and also specifically from researching our recent report 
defaultWhitehall Monitor 2013
default, which is our first attempt to provide an annual data-driven picture of the size, shape and performance of Whitehall. We analysed information published as open data under the Government’s transparency agenda, as well as other key data on the operations of government such as Budgets and departmental annual reports and accounts.
defaultIn setting out its transparency agenda, the Government has put a challenge to external users to become ’armchair auditors’ and exposed itself to scrutiny. For this to be effective, users interested in understanding government and holding it to account need to be able to use data that is easy to access, interpret, and analyse. 
defaultWe believe that clarity, transparency and accessibility of key government data in general, and key financial data, such as budgets, in particular, are crucial to improving the effectiveness of government. Data that is easy to access and interpret externally can also enable better decision making inside government. When data is presented consistently and makes comparisons possible, for instance between departments, this can help decision makers in government.
defaultIn answering the Committee’s questions, we argue that:
defaultQuestions defaultWe have answered those questions to which our experience with government data is particularly relevant.
defaultQuestion default5. How can more statistics and administrative data of all kinds become more freely available? defaultWe 
defaulthave found that following several simple principles in how data is published would make it available to a wider range of users for an array of purposes – from users interested in particular facts to users interested in analysing and reusing government data. We set these out below in response to the relevant questions about data quality and formats.
defaultWe have set out our recommendations in full in our recent publication 
defaultWhitehall Monitor 2013
default (
defaultAnnex A
default), which is available at 
defaultwww.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/our-work/whitehall-monitor
defaultBeyond these recommendations, we have also noticed that some information formerly published on departmental websites has been more difficult to locate following the transition to gov.uk. For instance, departmental 
defaultorganograms
default have become more difficult to find (and the interactive version can be difficult to use) and some data, to which data.gov.uk links, has not been migrated, making the data portal less useful. Even set piece announcement documents such as Budgets are on occasion difficult to find.
defaultWe also believe that government effectiveness could be enhanced by making more data on contracted and commissioned public services available to the public. In particular, choice and competition would be enhanced if data on the performance of public service providers were published in a consistent fashion and made available to service users and external experts. It can also be argued that if more were known publicly about the economic performance of private sector service providers, the government would be better positioned effectively to fulfil its commissioner role in public service markets.
defaultQuestion default6. Is open data presented well and of adequate quality? defaultWe have found that the accessibility, quality, and presentation of government data varies widely between departments and datasets.
defaultWith respect to how data is presented and how easy it is for a user to locate the right data set, we propose that publishers of data follow several principles outlined below. 
defaultWith respect to higher-level spending data (budgets, spending reviews) better documentation is needed as to what individual headings contain (e.g. ‘Cabinet Office’ can refer to different aggregates between documents).Better documentation of baselines is also required including whether or not they should be comparable across documents and why they differ. Ultimately, users should be able to reconcile changes to plans or baselines between publications.
defaultFor instance, in the recent spending round, external users were unable to reconcile figures for departmental spending in Spending Round 2013 and the relevant figures in Spending Review 2010. Several examples of this issue are discussed in our recent blog on Spending Round 2013, available at 
defaulthttp://www.instituteforgovernment.org.uk/blog/5532/spending-review-2013-taking-on-the-union/
defaulta. Are the formats of the data being published accessible, useable and understandable to the public? defaultNo – in our experience we found that data is not consistently published in formats most useful to the public. Several key data sources are not currently available in an accessible format. This includes budgets and autumn statements, spending review and spending round documents, Estimates, and many departmental annual reports and accounts. These are only available in PDF formats, making the data very difficult to reuse. Some estimates memoranda, which are key for interpreting this financial data, are not publicly available.
defaultIn general, we suggest that the following improvements would make data much more usable for a wider range of users:
defaultb. What metadata is needed to make releases useful? defaultWe
default have also made recommendations regarding the documentation of published data, some of which could explicitly be incorporated as metadata. The most useful basic pieces of metadata would be the following:
defaultc. Who will use the data released? defaultAs noted above, one objective of the transparency agenda, under which many new datasets are being published, is to encourage external users to use the data for holding government to account. Many of the datasets released so far can enable this, but to realise this potential, more needs to be done to make the data easy to find, interpret, and analyse. Only then will it become clear what the full range of interested users is. 
defaultBeside the public, better data could also prove useful to leaders inside government. When data is presented clearly to the public in a way that makes comparisons possible, it also encourages better use of data and enables better decisions inside government. This relates to information on the functioning of government departments and bodies, but also on public service markets.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default