&#xa0;
defaultCatriona Cook MBEdefault – Written evidencedefault  defaultCommenting on:  defaultUse of Land, Clauses 12-19, under a personal capacity to General Questions 1-8.
default1. 
defaultBackground: defaultwe are commercial farmers with every conceivable type of right of way across our farm (footpaths, bridleways, an unsurfaced road enjoyed by motorists, and an unrecorded route, now on the definitive map). For the past 30 years I have been a voluntary British Horse Society (BHS) regional and county access officer, and am chairman of the Byways and Bridleways Trust (BBT).  I have helped to return some 100 miles of under and unrecorded byways and bridleways to the public domain by getting these historic routes properly recorded onto the definitive map (DM). I have often asked landowners to dedicate bridleways, with singular lack of success when asking for a brand new route, but when accompanied by historical evidence, with some success. I was a North York Moors National Park Authority member for 10 years and am currently chairman of their Local Access Forum (LAF). 
default2.  My vision is for riders of horses (90% female) and cycles (predominately male) to have a comprehensive rights of way network, similar to the walkers’ network. Rights of way provide physical and mental well being for all age and ability groups and access to the natural environment. Riding is particularly attractive to teenage girls providing much needed exercise, and they feel safe to do so alone, unlike walking alone. Through default and design byway and bridleway users of the public have lost miles of what by rights belongs to them.
default3.  Miles of ancient byways and bridleways were never properly recorded in the 1950’s during the DM process as riding was at a low ebb after the war, there was no equestrian access organisation and many parishes were chaired by landowners. Riders often relied on landowners for grazing, hay etc and were locals and so did not object; the same constraints are relevant today. Landowners often cite uncertainty, but they are as capable of researching public documents as regards public routes across their own land as any member of the public. 
default4.  Question 1. Rights of way are so complex legally, that it would not be possible to achieve the desired changes by using secondary legislative procedures alone.
default5.   Question 2. Again the complexity of the subject needs 
defaultvery defaultcareful scrutiny of the proposed legislative changes.
default6.  Question 3. No, not all the changes are evidence based and there is an element of wishful thinking as regards the completion of the definitive map. Bearing in mind that local authorities (LAs) have had 63 years to do so, one years grace after 2016 when all ancient routes will be extinguished by statute appears unrealistic. Nor with LA financial cut backs, will these proposals be completed in many areas. Some LAs do not
default defaulteven have a DM officer. The risk for a member of the public having to go to the magistrate’s court over a recalcitrant LA, rather than the present appeal mechanism is against natural justice. It should 
defaultbe remember that however good a rights of way officer is, they can be manipulated by elected members who are often diversifying landowners with their own agendas. 
default7.  Question 4: On the whole yes. But more safeguards need to be built in for the public’s rights when there is an unwilling local authority. 
default8.  Question 5: There will be great benefits to landowners. Not as many to the general public.
default9. Question 6: The Stakeholder Working Group (SWG) package taken as a whole should ease the process, but schedule 316 raises the bar the public has to reach by removing “reasonably alleged to subsist”, for DM applications.
default10. Question 7: I do not believe that equality issues are fully addressed, since completing the DM and recording under and unrecorded routes is primarily advantageous to higher rights users who do not at present have a right of way network. These are public rights and as such I believe should have a higher bias than the rights of private landowners, who have a personal advantage by denying these ancient rights.
default11. Question 8: If higher rights users finally get a proper network of rights of way, then the economy will gain. Riders come from all social backgrounds and contribute millions to the local economy. But in areas with no higher rights network riding schools and horse liveries are unable to be successful. This also affects the ability for cyclists to have safe off road access.
default12. Since riding is predominately female I sincerely hope that you will take evidence from a female equestrian and would like to propose Elizabeth Kirk. She is extremely knowledgeable and experienced in rights of way matters; as well as being partially disabled through arthritis, thus relying on a pony to be able to access the natural environment. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default2
default&#xa0;
default