&#xa0;
defaultWdefaultritten evidence from RMT Union (SLC 022)defaultIntroductiondefaultThe National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport
default Workers (RMT) welcome the opportunity to submit our views as part of TRANSCOM’s inquiry into safety at level crossings.
defaultThe RMT organises 
default16
default,000 Network Rail employees 
defaultincluding over 4
default,
default000 signallers and level crossing keepers directly responsible
default for the
default safe flow of traffic and the operation and maintenance of level crossing
defaults
default.
default We also represent 11,000 railway maintenance
default 
defaultworkers some of whom are called upon to deal with the tragic aftermath of level crossing accidents. 
defaultRMT also represent
default 
defaultmembers who work 
defaultf
defaultor
default all the 
defaulttrain and freight 
defaultoperating companies, working at all grades from driver to station staff.
default 
defaultMany of the staff who work for the train operating companies are 
defaultalso 
defaultaffected by level crossing accidents
defaultExecutive Summarydefault&#xa0;
default1.1 
defaultNo,
default they are not. 
defaultIn the last 10 years there have been 93
default pedestrian and road vehicle occupant fatalities associated with 
defaultall 
defaultlevel crossings.
default During this 10 year period the level of fatalities has not reduced
default significantly
default.
default1.2 
defaultIn comparison during the same
default period rail passenger fatalities from non level crossing accidents are 72
default (27% lower
default than level crossing accidents
default). Fatalities for the railway workforce during the same period were 30
default (68% lower
default 
defaultthan level crossing accidents
default).
default In the same 10 year perio
defaultd there have been 
defaultjust 
default5
default passenger/workforce fatalities in a train accident 
default(95% lower
default 
defaultthan level crossing accidents
default),
default 
defaultand for the last six year in succession there were no train accidents resulting in passenger or workforce fatalities. 
default1.3
default 
defaultRMT believe t
defaulthat a single death is a death too many and the level of fatalities associated with level crossings must be reduced
default by the rail industry.
default1.4
default 
defaultAfter fatalities associated with suicide and trespass on the railway, level crossings represent the highest risk on
default the GB rail network.
default1.5
default 
defaultSince 2004 RMT have 
defaultadopted
default a policy that calls on the rail industry to develop a programme to eliminate level crossings from high-speed railway lines, replacing them with underpasses or bridges, and for a feasibility study on the
default rest of the network with the ultimate aim of removing all level crossings from Britain’s rail network.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2.1 
defaultUltimately the most cost effective solution is permanent closure of all level crossings.
default3.1 
defaultRMT believes that all level crossings
default should be closed and that Network Rail should
default be
default required to deliver a plan to maximise the reduction in level crossings, and consequently accidents, by ring-fencing a substantial portion of its expenditure for that specific purpose. RMT believes that the
default £67m ring-fenced fund suggested in ORR’s draft determination is inadequate.
default 
default3.2
default 
defaultOf course the issue of prioritising expenditure on improving level crossing safety cannot be separated from the wider public debate about the structure of the industry. Indep
defaultendent reports state that costs of the privatised and fragmented rail system amount to £1.2bn a year compared 
defaultto 
defaultif the industry was in public 
defaultownership.
default 
default Even by making some 
defaultinternal structural reforms Network Rail could save considerable amounts
default. Bringi
defaultng rail maintenance in
default 
defaulthouse for example saved £400m
default a year and it is estimated that taking similar steps in respect of rail renewals could save £200m.
default3.3 
defaultCurrently ORR and Network Rail have provisions to open new level crossings and allow land developm
defaultent in the vicinity of level crossings. 
defaultRMT believe that there should be no new level crossings brought into use on the railway network and further believe any development in the geographical vicinity of existing level crossings should be resisted if it ca
defaultn be shown that such development 
defaultwould result in an increase in
default road
default traffic over the level crossing.
default 
default3.4 For example in a case where an industrial estate has its access over a level crossing and the owners wish to expand the estate then they should be prevented from expansion unless another form of access can be provided which results in the level crossin
defaultg closure. 
default3.4 
defaultORR policy is that new level crossings can be allowed in certain circumstances such as if a crossing becomes unsafe or a previously closed crossing is brought back into service. RMT believe this policy is wrong.
default4.1 
defaultHaving concluded that level crossings carry the highest risk on
default the railway Network Rail have undertaken a
default considerable amount of work to improve safety both through its own activity and working wi
defaultth other stakeholders. However
default,
default RMT are concerned that too much of the effort is being invested in new technology solutions while at the same time moving away from the use of human intervention. 
default4.2 
defaultWhile new 
defaulttechnology
default does have a role to play
default,
default there are
default simpler cost effective human controls that can be utilised.
default RMT have recently raised concerns over Obstacle Detection Level Crossings with Network Rail in relation to testing of this equipment on the Crewe Shrewsbury line
default.
default 
defaultWhile
default the company have gone some
default way to reassure us we still remain concerned that this new technology is not yet fit for purpose.
default4.3 
defaultDue to 
defaultRMT’s
default concerns on the Crewe Shrewsbury 
defaultline 
defaultMP’s signed EDM 1169: “
defaultThat this House notes that the implementation of the Crewe to Shrewsbury modula
defaultr signalling scheme has been beset with problems causing its delay; is deeply concerned that barriers on the currently manned level crossings have not been fitted with the correct detectors, which means that if they were to be operated remotely they would 
defaultnot detect a car underneath; further notes that this has forced manual signal boxes to be retained; is concerned that this may only be a short-term measure; and calls on the Government to ask Network Rail to carry out a review as to the viability of contin
defaultuing with the scheme.
default”
default4.4 
defaultRMT representatives in the location submitted a series of concerns over the numbers and types of detectors, delays in signals reverting to red, delays in handling of telephone calls in relation to level crossing and equipment bei
defaultng contaminated by dirt and oil and becoming in-operative.
default While the company have gone some way to reassure RMT we still remain concerned that this new technology is not yet fit for purpose
default a
defaultnd
default further delays to the programme are to be expected.
default4.5 
defaultAdditionally with the move
default away from local control of level crossings to Regional Operating Centres RMT believe that the loss of local knowledge and control will result in more accidents and fatalities. 
defaultT
defaulthe numbers of signalers and level crossing keepers w
defaultill be reduced 
defaultby about 2,400 over the next ten years
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default5.1 
defaultNo, it is not. 
defaultThe ORR is the economic as well as the safety regulator and so is conflicted from being a genuine, independent safety regulator.
default5.2 
defaultIt is the Government, through the ORR that controls the ‘purse strings’ of the rail industry. They therefore bear the respo
defaultnsibility for level crossing accidents if they restrict funding on expenditure
default. 
defaultThe ORR h
defaultav
defaulte
default already imposed efficiency savings of 50% in the last 10 years
default 
defaultso 
defaultthe amount of money available for work to improve safety at level crossings is reduced
default.
default 
defaultFollowing
default the 
defaultMcNulty 
defaultRail Value for Money Study, calls to establish integrated control centres for signalling, could potentially create greater dangers at level crossings. 
default5.3
default 
defaultReduction in 
defaultthe 
defaultmoney available to the rail industry through its cuts programme 
defaultthreat
defaultens
default improvements that have been made on level crossings in recent years.
default5
default.4
default 
defaultConsideration should be given to 
defaultestablish
defaulting
default a national level crossing
default review group to develop a national plan on level crossing safety (see para 7.2).
default6.1 
defaultThe current law on level crossings is complex, outdated and difficult to access, creating problems for regulators, owners and operators and increasing the safety risk for users. Much of the existing law was develo
defaultped in the 19
defaultth
default Century and is not fit for purpose. 
default&#xa0;
default6.2 RMT are concerned that t
defaulthe Law Commission Review of Level Crossing Legislation 
defaulthas not yet been published
default.
default When it is published there will need to be appropriate stakeholder consideration on its fin
defaultdings. However careful consideration will need to be given to any recommendation that makes the current legislative minefield easier to negotiate.
default&#xa0;
default6.3 RMT 
defaultbelieves
default that there are approximately 2,000 level crossings (excluding city centre crossings) that a
defaultre within 200m of an alternative means of crossing the infrastructure. 
defaultThere should be a legislative method of making large scale level crossing closures to remove these level crossings as soon as possible.
default This may require additional spending to make the 
defaultalternative crossing safe for all users e.g. upgrading footpaths and access routes to meet the requirements of displace
defaultment
default from the level crossing.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default7.1 
defaultNetwork Rail does not work in 
defaultisolation and though responsible for the safe operation of level crossings other bodies have a role to play. 
defaultRMT do not believe that the current Road-Rail Interface Safety Group’s membership is wide enough.
default7.2 
defaultRMT believe that  
defaultthe Government and ORR shou
defaultld assist 
defaultNetwork Rail and the rail industry 
defaultin 
defaultwork
defaulting
default with the very broadest range of stakeholders including the trade unions, DfT, Local Authorities, the insurance industry, charities, driving schools, education authorities, and the like to raise public
default awareness.
default7.3 The HSE publish ‘Driving at work – Man
defaultaging work related road safety. (
defaultINDG383
default) this includes a mention of planning journeys for hazards including level crossings. RMT believe that ORR should publish guidance for all level crossing users an
defaultd a publicity campaign should be launched 
defaultto support this 
defaultwhich addresses 
defaultlevel crossing risks to enable road transport operators 
defaultto develop 
defaultan improved safety approach to level crossing risks
default.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13
default RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13
default RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13
default RSSB – Annual Safety Performance Report 2012/13
default Rebuilding Rail, Report by Transport  for Quality of Life, June 2012
default McNulty Rail Value for Money Study, May 2012
default Rebuilding Rail, Report by Transport  Quality for Life, June 2012
default