&#xa0;
defaultEIS 08
defaultWritten evidence submitted by IntierraRMG (UK)default&#xa0;
defaultThe contribution below (in 
defaultbolddefault) is made on behalf of IntierraRMG (UK), a mining database provider, whose head office is in Perth, Australia.
default&#xa0;
default1. What is the contribution to the UK economy of extractive industries in the UK?
defaultAlthough the direct contributidefaulton to the economy from the domestic extractive industry is low, there is a significant contribution from related sectors (see below).default&#xa0;
default2. How does the UK-based extractive industr
defaulty
default support employment:
defaulta) In the UK, and 
defaultb) For UK citizens overseas?
defaultThis defaultempdefaultloyment defaultsupport default(both within and external to the UK) defaultstems, largely, from the UK's historic mining prowess. defaultBecause of its once-large extractive industry, tdefaulthe region has a well-developed mining equipment and service sector, which now supplies the internatidefaultonal industry.default&#xa0;
default3. Does UK industry benefit more widely from the UK’s position as a centre for extractive industries
default,
default 
defaulteg i
defaultn sales of machinery and services to international businesses in the sector?
defaultYes, clearly. Manufacturers in the UK design, make and defaultdespatch equipment for the international mining industry, and there are myriad organisations in the UK that can be expected to benefit from this activity. These include the importers and fabricators of metal, transport companies, external (local) consultandefaultts on design and construction, and banks/brokers that finance the work. Non-mining UK industries will also benefit from the additional earnings and expertise of the mining-related companies and their staff. default&#xa0;defaultBeing an acknowledged centre of excellence will defaultalso attract visits by overseas mining companies, whose executives are likely to visit other associated industries while in the UK (eg the London Stock Exchange, defaultLondon Metal Exchange, defaultstaff recruitment firms, risk assessors, security and logistics advisordefaults, mining engineering firms and metals traders).default&#xa0;
default4. Has the boom in London-listed extractive companies with businesses overseas over the last two decades resulted in a strengthening in the UK’s competitive position in this sector?
defaultThere is no clear direct evidence of a stronger competitive position. However, the improved strength in related sectors (finance, law and risk assessment) is likely to have made defaulta positivedefault indirect defaultimpact.default For example, the UK accounted for almost 22% of thdefaulte finance raised globally for mining in the quarter to end-June. This defaultmadedefault defaultthe London Stock Exchange third only to the Toronto Stock Exchange and the Australia Stock Exchange.default&#xa0;
default5. What are the corporate governance concerns raised by the number of extract
defaultive industries companies listed in the UK? Are there reputational risks for the UK and UK financial institutions in being a centre for such businesses?
defaultThere have been defaultserious defaultcorporate-governance issues at several mining companies listed in the UK with opdefaulterations overseasdefault, and there is certainly a risk to the UK's defaultrepudefaulttation. This seems likely, however, to be kept under control.default&#xa0;
default6. Is there sufficient engagement between UK extractive industries and the NGO sector? Are there examples of best practice in en
defaultgagement between the extractive industries and NGOs?
defaultThere is plenty of engagement between the two sectors, not least through the International Council of Metals and Mining. Nevertheless, more interaction is still required.default&#xa0;
default7. Does the UK have the skills 
defaultbase to remain a centre for the extractive i
defaultndustries and to ensure that UK-
defaultbased businesses benefit from potential future opportunities such as shale gas?
defaultYes, there is still a good-enough skills base. This is particularly strong in the finance and legal defaultsectors, and there is perhaps concern that the engineering skills might start to wither without a strong domestic extractive industry.default&#xa0;
default8. What is the impact of the industry of the UK signing up to the EITI?
defaultVery positive, in that defaultthe requirements of defaultEITI defaultare essential to maintaining defaultreputational risk, which is still defaulta defaultcore defaultstrength defaultof UKdefault businessesdefault.default&#xa0;
default9. Would 
defaultincreased regulation for London-
defaultlisted extractive companies result in competition from elsewhere
default,
default or can it be used to make the UK a centre of excell
defaultence for best practice and corporate governance?
defaultThere is no choice in this matter. UK businesses are highly regarded for their competence and reliability. Increased regulation might increase short-term competition but it is probably essential to maintain defaultgood practice (especially with so-many overseas companies coming to the UK for finance and advice).default&#xa0;
default10. What is the competitive landscape for the extractive
default industries in the 21st Century, 
defaultand is it in the UK’s interest to
default remain a global centre
default?
defaultCompetitdefaultion will increase with regard to the UK's supply of equipment and services, so domestic companies must focus on the quality and reliability of their offerings. This will be made easier if the UK (and London in particular) is able to maintain its role as a defaultglobal centre of excellence.default&#xa0;
defaultRegards
default&#xa0;
defaultDr Chris Hinde
defaultE
defaultditorial D
defaultirector
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 20th, 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default