&#xa0;
defaultWWC003defaultWritten evidence submitted by Richard Burden MPdefaultIntroductiondefaultAs the MP for Birmingham Northfield I welcome the oppo
defaultrtunity to make a submission to the Education Select Committee inquiry into the educational underachievement of white working class children.
defaultThis submission 
defaultbuilds on a debate I held on this issue 
defaulti
defaultn May 2009, when a report funded by Birmingham City Counc
defaultil revealed that 
defaulta high number of white pupils on free school meals in Birmingham we
defaultre performing poorly at schools.
default1
default 
defaultMy response focuses on the 
defaultextent of – and factors leading to –
default 
defaultwhite working class pupils 
defaulteducational underachievement, and approaches th
defaulte Government can ta
defaultke in response
default.
default In summary, this 
defaultsubmission:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultExtent of White Working Class Underachievementdefault&#xa0;
defaultIn 20
default10-2011
default less than a third of white British students eligible for Free School Means (FSM) reached the national GCSE target of 5A*-C passes including English and Maths. Barely a quarter of boys, and just above a third of girls, achieved the target. In contrast, 63%
default of white British students not eligible for FSM reached the national target. The 
defaultsize of the attainment gap 
defaultbetween FSM and non-FSM students is unique to t
defaulthe white
default ethnic group.
default2
default&#xa0;
defaultIn Birmingham, statistics from 2001-2003 revealed that
default following
default African Car
defaultibbean boys 
defaultreceiving
default FSM, 
defaultthe 
defaultdemographic groups least likely to achieve 5 A*-C at GCSE were white boys and girls
default receiving
default FSM. Looking beyond averages, the absolute numbers of white pupils underachieving in education makes this issue particularly concer
defaultning. In 2003, 486 white pupils (compared to 89 Pakistani pupils, 56 black pupils, and 18 Bangladeshi pupils) in Birmingham did not achieve any GCSE grades at all.
default 
default1 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn higher education, 2012 saw a fall of
default 
default54,000 
defaultwhite 
defaultmen applying to university, 
defaultwhich w
defaultas 
defaulta
default d
defaultecrease of 13% from 
default2011 
default– 
defaultand four tim
defaultes higher than the reduction of female 
defaultapplicants. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultFactors leading to White Working Class Underachievement default&#xa0;defaultThe
default reality is still that if you are white and disadvantaged, you are half as likely to achieve in education as those who are better off. 
defaultThe odds are decisively stacked against poor white defaultchildren achieving within the education system. default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultreasons for educ
defaultational underachievement 
defaultin impoverished groups 
defaultare myriad 
defaultand well documented
default. Inadequate 
defaulthousing, weak parental involvement, 
defaultpoor schoo
defaultl quality, familial low income and unemployment, and low aspiration and expectation
default 
defaultall 
defaultcontributing 
defaultto 
defaultwhy 
defaultchildren 
defaultfrom lower socio-
defaulteconomic groups are less successful at school
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe geographic
defaultal
default areas in which white working class educational underachievement is most marked are also the areas 
defaultthat have
default undergone massive change in employment patterns and relative weal
defaultth. In many cases this is associated with the decline of large enterprises associated with traditional industries – such as manufacturing – over the last quarter of the 20
defaultth
default Century. Although some of those industries have undergone a major and very positiv
defaulte transformation in recent years (such as automotive), 
defaultthis innovation has often bypassed the people in the areas
default traditionally 
defaultassociated
default with those industries.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe result is that inequality has grown, albeit highly unevenly even in geographically compac
defaultt areas, with pockets of high deprivation, low skills, high long term unemployment and low aspiration close to areas of relative affluence. 
defaultThis has a 
defaultmajor impact in increasing educational underachievement in the areas concerned. There are lessons here ab
defaultout the impact of some of the government’s current welfare reforms, which could 
defaultfurther 
defaultaggravate the problem. That these issues are beyond the sc
defaultope of this paper should not 
defaultminimise their importance.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThe ‘neighbourhood effect
default’ – how a community social
defaultises p
defaulteople – is also a leading factor in 
defaultreinforcing cycles
default of
default low aspiration and
default underachievement.
default3
default 
defaultChildren in white working class communities do not benefit from the 
defaultsocial and cultural capital of the middle classes, which is more conducive to
default success 
defaultin
default education
default and schools. 
defaultW
defaulthite children from disadvant
defaultaged backgrounds do not grow up with 
defaultthe 
defaultknowledge
default – or role models 
default– that
default demonstrate that education
default 
defaultprovides 
defaultopportunity, 
defaultor that hard work 
defaultcreates
default success and financial security. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSchool based defaultinterventionsdefault&#xa0;
defaultIn terms of specific 
defaultinterventions to
default address white 
defaultunderachievement
default at school
default,
default 
defaultlessons can be 
defaultlearnt 
defaultfrom success in
default reducing black minority et
defaulthnic disadvantage in education. Action is needed on a number of different levels: 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultIn 2009 
defaultI stated that 
defaultwhen statistics are compiled to inform education policy
default, the
default 
defaultGovernment must
default subdivide the white ethnic group according to 
defaulteligibility 
defaultfor free school meals. 
defaultAlthough the results of white children on FSM are now collect
defaulted, 
defaultm
defaultajor improvements need to be made in the dissemination
default of data 
defaultso
default that
default 
defaultaccurate conclusions 
defaultand assessment
default 
defaultcan be made easily
default.
default 
defaultSubdividing results by raci
defaultal and economic categories needs to become
default routine 
defaultand explicit 
defaultif we are to
default better
default understand, and act upon, 
defaultthis issue. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSchools – and teachers –
default are critical for 
defaultequipping children with the skills, opportunities and behaviour that will help them succeed in later life.  
defaultR
defaultaising school quality in disadvantaged areas is clearl
defaulty of paramount importance 
defaultfor improving achievement
default.
default 
defaultSchools in disadvantaged areas face 
defaultresourcing 
defaultpressures (such as equipment, subsidising the cost of trips, security and pastoral care) and difficulty in staff retention, standards and morale
default. 
defaultThe defaultGoverndefaultment should consider defaultoptions for defaulttdefaultargeting funding on defaultschools in areas with low white working class achievemendefaulttdefault beyond the Pupil Premiumdefault. defaultTh
defaultese
default could include 
defaultmeasures to incentivise outstanding teachers
default,
default or support q
defaultuality 
defaultvocational
default schemes
default that provide real to alternatives to the academic route.
default&#xa0;
defaultResearch has also demonstrated
default that
default successful
default schools can 
defaulthave
default a small scale, local 
defaultimpact on regeneration within 
defaulta community.
default4
default 
defaultThe 
defaultimpact
default 
defaultthat the new
default Bournville College – opened in 2010 with
default Lab
defaultour Government funding for the regeneration of Longbridge
default 
defaultafter MG Rover collapsed in 200
default5 – has made in my constituency
default is testament to how 
defaultwell-
defaultrun educational 
defaultfacilities can raise local aspiration and 
defaultopportunities
default.
default Further targeted efforts, similar to 
defaultthat which funded Bournville, are needed. In light of this, the Department of Education must question the provision of resources and support for new free 
defaultschools and academies 
defaultin areas where there are already good schools
default 
default– 
defaultor 
defaultwhere 
defaultthe development of impr
defaultoving schools could be undermined
default. Rather, the focus must be on
default targeting the 
defaultareas of greatest need.
default&#xa0;
defaultBut, as noted above, a child’s background and environment is almost decisive in determining their educational outcomes. Although improving school quality
default in disadvantaged areas is important, the Government must recognise that the impact a school can have in turning a child’s life chances around is limited. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultIt has also been well noted that 
defaultstrong 
defaultparental engagement is important for raising 
defaulteducational achievement.
default5
default 
defaultSuccessful parenting for 
defaulteducation includes
default the
default provision of a stable and secur
defaulte environment
default for study
default,
default raising a child’s aspiration and ambition, and crucially – 
default strong
default 
defaultparticipation wi
defaultth the school. However s
defaultchool discriminatio
defaultn
default, stereotyping and
default distrust 
defaultof low income parents
default has been well noted and remains a barrier to the successful engagement of such families in their child’s education.
default6
default&#xa0;
defaultTdefaulthe Government defaultneed to considerdefault defaulthow defaultschools can improve engagement with families from defaultdisadvantageddefault backgroundsdefault. P
defaultolicies to 
defaultensure schools can 
defaultconstructively and positively engage with parents from w
defaulthite working class backgrounds will be crucial for
default ensur
defaulting
default 
defaultparents 
defaultwill s
defaultupport, 
defaultrather than restrict
default,
default educational achievement. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTackling defaultthe Economic Environmentdefault&#xa0;
defaultHowever, the Government must recognise that the 
defaultodefaultverall impact of a young person’s external environment on attainment is enormous.default 3.5 million children in the UK live in poverty, a figure which is expected to rise further with the
default introduction of the Government’s tax and benefit reforms. 
default&#xa0;
defaultGiven the fundamental importance of eco
defaultnomic inequality and community, 
defaultthere is a clear need to tackle and economic environment to increase white working class attainment. 
defaultA piecemeal response - 
defaultfocusing solely on school based interventions and not tackling larger national questions of unemployment, skills, low pay and work insecurity, the poor availability and affordability of housing, and the rising cost of living – will be ineffective at improv
defaulting opportunities for poor white children.
default At a more local level, t
defaulthere must be a concerted effort to ensure that physical and 
defaultenterprise regeneration initiatives reach 
defaultthe areas concerned.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe importance of the wider economic environment in a child’s edu
defaultcation highlights
default why targeted educational initiatives of the kind outlined in this paper 
defaultwill need to consider the
default industrial heritage of the communities involved
default, and aim to
default dramatically 
defaultboost skills
default 
defaultin the industries of the future. But rather than as a 
defaultwake for days gone by, 
defaultthis heritage needs to be celebrated and built on
default 
defaultraise aspiration for the future.
default&#xa0;defaultAn Inclusive Cultural Adefaultpproachdefault&#xa0;
defaultMulti-culturalism has made a highly successful and valuable contribution to
default 
defaultUK
default 
defaultsociety
default – making our country
default more inclusive, tolerant and vibrant
default. 
defaultBut
default it is well documented that there has been insufficient 
defaultrecognition and celebration of 
defaultthe 
defaultoften diverse heritage of
default 
defaultculture and 
defaultidentity of
default white communities, particularly in or near to major towns or in specific 
defaultareas of the country 
default– 
defaultsuch as traditional coastal resorts
default.
default 
default The
default Department of Education has previously acknowledged that needs to greater efforts made to include white people in discussions on diversity and identity,
default7
default but there is little evidence to demon
defaultstrate that 
defaultthe Government has actively pursued 
defaultsuch pol
defaulticies.
default&#xa0;
defaultSchools are important places for helpin
defaultg children explore
default their identity, and more 
defaultemphasis needs to be made on how teachers can support white pupils to develop and express their culture 
defaultand 
defaultbackground
default. When developing such policies, the Government must be cautious to ensure that a white
default British history and narrative 
defaultis not promoted at the
default expense of all other
default cultures – as
default is the danger with the current Secretary of State for Education’s
default refo
defaultrm of national curriculum.
default It must also be 
defaultclearly
default differentiated
default 
defaultand unequivocally opposed to 
defaultthe racially divisive approach of groups such as E
defaultnglish 
defaultD
defaultefence 
defaultL
defaulteague (EDL) and t
defaulthe British National Party (BNP). 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe kind of approach
default 
defaultarticulated by perform
defaulters such as Billy Bragg and academics such as 
defaultthe 
defaultBirmingham community historian, Carl Chinn, may be useful in taking forward this expression of identity.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn brief, t
defaulthe focus must be on
default promoting a more inclusive approach
default, which
default 
defaultcelebrates
default the numerous di
defaultfferent cultures that make up 
defaultthe 21
defaultst
default Century British identity
default and aims 
defaultto ensure that the school environment gives children from all backgrounds a fair start. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1The Forward Partnership on behalf of the School Effectiveness Division, Children, Young 
defaultPeople and Families Directorate, Birmingham City Council,
default The
default 
default 
defaultUnderachievement of White Disadvantaged Pupils in Birmingham, 
defaultReport 1, November 2008
default3
default 
defaultAinsworth J (2002) why does it take a village? The mediation of neighbourhood effects on educational achievement Social Forces 81(1): 117-152
default4
default 
defaultCrowther, D et al: How schools can contribute to area regeneration, the Policy Press 2003
default5
default Parsons S, Give your child a better chance, Campaign for Learning 2003
default6
default Lott B (2001) Low-income parents and the public schools, Journal of Social Issues pp 247-259
default7
defaultDFES (2007a) Diversity and Citizenship Curriculum Review
default&#xa0;
default