EIS 13
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Mining On TopdefaultWhat is the contribution to the UK economy of extractive industries in the UK? defaultSummarydefault of main pointsdefault:defaultAbout me and my submission:defaultI make this submission on behalf of Mining On
default Top; the conference and training division of IntierraRMG. IntierraRMG are the leading data supplier to the global mining industry with offices in Australia, across Canada, in Sweden and London. Mining On Top was launched in January 2013 in order to consol
defaultidate the company’s events and trainings under a single brand. I am the leader of the Mining On Top business.
default This submission will focus largely on the contribution of the 
defaultmetals and minerals 
defaultexploration and mining industry to the UK economy.
defaultI have a BA i
defaultn Social Ethics and worked in Financial Services for many years before stumbling int
defaulto the mining industry in January 2010. I have organised more than 30 mining focused conferences
default, seminars
default and trainings in the UK, Europe and Africa. 
defaultThe reason for the Mi
defaultning On Top submission of evidence is that we 
defaultpassionately 
defaultbelieve that mining is an essential enabler of social and economic development in developing nations where the mineral endowment is often 
defaultrich and underexploited
default. The UK industry must be strong and
default transparent in order to be at the forefront of the facilitation of this development
default and to ensure the supply of the resources critical 
defaultto the UK population and business
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultRecommendations:defaultAnswers:default1.defaultHow does the UK based extractivedefault industries support employment A) in the UK and Bdefault) for UK citizens overseas?defaultThere are four types of structures that make a 
defaultcontribution
default to the UK economy from extractives. They are:- 
defaultFrom the first two categories the contribution to the UK economy is not that high (although in the past the mining industry in the UK 
defaultcontributed significantly, 
defaultth
defaulte contribution of North Sea oil and gas has been substantial and shale gas is set to make a substantial contribution 
defaultto the economy 
defaultin the future).
defaultToday, the biggest economic contribution comes from the third and fourth categories. It is no coincidence th
defaultat global companies like BHP Billiton and Anglo American have decided to list and headquarter in London; London provides the best access to capital markets, investment, expertise and extractive support services of anywhere in the world. Other extractives c
defaultentres (such as Perth, Vancouver, Calgary, Nordics, Houston and Johannesburg) do not come close to the depth and history and experience, built up over many centuries, which is found in the UK. 
defaultUK engineering expertise is regarded as some of the most relia
defaultble on the planet and an essential component of any successful mining project. 
defaultThis expertise is utilised by UK and international companies. Every day Canadian and Australian mining companies are in London to secure expertise, finance and services. 
defaultThe UK
default has historically been home to some of the world’s most respected mining engineering and geological colleges with Imperial College, Royal School of Mines, Cardiff and Cambourne.
defaultA.
defaultThe UK based extractives industry supports employment in the UK in many indu
defaultstries. Clearly in varied roles working within UK based mining companies, but also within financial services – 
defaultmetals traders, 
defaultanalysts, brokers, investment bankers, asset and wealth managers, stock brokers, fund managers and in private equity and venture 
defaultcapital. Insurance, 
defaultlaw and accounting 
defaultare other
default large area
defaults
default of employment. 
defaultOther services such as 
defaultrecruitment, 
defaultPR/ IR 
defaultgeological, engineering, risk and environmental consultancy
default are also represented. Data, publications, investor presentations, conferences and training are another 
defaultare where the UK leads
default. 
defaultFinally, but not exclusively, engineering, equipment and infrastructure and building services also contribute to the industry. 
defaultThese include 
defaultbuilding, 
defaultexplosives, piping, drills, water management, power generators, steel products and a large variety of other products and services.
defaultI am not sure of the total universe 
defaultof UK people involved in the industry 
defaultbut I do know that there ar
defaulte over one thousand Women in Mining members in the UK and women are not highly represented in the industry.
defaultB.There are a high number of UK citizens working abroad in the mining industry and many have migrated to mining boom areas, such as Western Australi
defaulta, Africa and South America to fill skills shortages in those regions and to supply expertise in the form of consultancy and services.
defaultUnsubstantiated estimates 
defaultclaim 
defaultthat the contribution to the UK economy of the wider mining and support industry is 
defaultover 
defaulttwenty percent. 
default2.Does UK industry benefit more widely from the UK’s position as a centre for extractive industries i.e. In sales of machinery and services to international businesses in the sector?defaultUK industry benefits more widely
default from its position as a 
defaultcentre of excellence for extractives in economic terms (as discussed above) but also from innovations which are generated by the need to solve complex engineering issues in mining projects.
default These innovations feed into the general engineering offering in the UK.
defaultMining projects are complex engineering initiatives. Bulk commodities – coal and iron ore -are really transportation projects; bauxite is a power story and much processing has a heavy reliance on chemical and water and waste treatment. For this reason 
defaultengi
defaultneering consultancy 
defaultcompanies such as Mott MacDonald have recently established a mining division to capitalise on these opportunities.
defaultIf you attend a large mining conference, such as the Prospectors and Developers Association Conference or Mining Indaba y
defaultou will see many familiar UK engineering and equipment companies represented
default who are looking to earn additional clients in the mining sector
default.
defaultAnother important point to make is that the jobs created by the mining industry are not just London centric. Consu
defaultltant Weir is based in Todmorden
default with a head office in Glasgow
default, SRK in Cardiff, ERM in Cambridge etc.
default3.Has the boom in London-listed extractive companies with businesses overseas over the last two decades resulted in a strengthening in the UK’s competitivdefaulte position in this sector?defaultThe boom in London listed extractive companies with businesses overseas has occurred due to the predominant position of the UK as the hub of the global mining industry and has reinforced that position. The Toronto Stock Exchange 
defaulthas more listed mining companies than the UK 
defaultat 1638 compared with 179, 
defaultbut their average size
default in terms of
default market capitalisation and share price tends to be smaller
default (£1129m cf $170m)
default. No other exchanges come close.
default4.What are the corporate governance concedefaultrns raised by the number of extractive industries companies listed in the UK? Are there reputational risks for the UK and UK financial institutions in being a centre for such businesses?defaultSome recent, high profile cases of alledged corporate governance irre
defaultgularities by London listed foreign extractive companies have caused co
defaultncern but should not provoke 
defaultover
default-
default reaction.
default There are parallels with recent issues in the banking sector but no one believes that the UK’s position as the leading financial centre in t
defaulthe world be scaled-back but rather that better governance is introduced to ensure that this position is protected and proper due-diligence procedures are followed.
defaultSimilarly with mining
default,
default sufficient and auditable but light-touch corporate governance legislation is essential. In the past Canada suffered a similar high profile extractives corporate governance scandal 
defaultin the 1990’s 
default(Br
defaulte-X
default) but has survived as a recognised centre of mining.
default5.defaultIs there sufficient engagement between UK extractive industries and the NGO sector? Are there examples of best practice in engagement between the extractive industries and NGOs?defaultIn the past the extractive sector in general has been too closed. This is prob
defaultably due to a lack of understanding of the importance of engaging with civil society and a lack of knowledge of how to engage. This has led to mistrust and a lack of awareness in wider society of the centrality of minerals and metals to everyday life. 
default Con
defaultsequently, 
defaultmining companies 
defaultwere 
defaulteven more reticent 
defaultto put their heads above the parapet 
defaultand 
defaultit 
defaulthas enabled NGOs to set the agenda and perceptions of the industry.
defaultThis situation is beginning to change among the more forwa
defaultrd thinking mining companies 
defaultas ga
defaultining social license to operate becomes more important a
defaultnd
default civil society becomes increasingly powerful. At the same time it sometimes appears that there is 
defaultunwillingness
default amongst NGOs to engage with the mining industry and listen to an alternative viewpoint
default.
defaultThe recent Mining On Top: Africa – London Summit in June had African Mining Ministers, UK MPs, miners, and industry suppliers around one table with NGOs debating 
defaultsustainability and how
default mining 
defaultcan be used to foster
default social and economic development of the c
defaultontinent.
default The event was one of the first to have all stakeholders around the same table to discuss these 
defaultissues and all the participants were amazed to discover how much common ground they had once they actually listened to each other.
defaultParticipants 
defaultincluded the London companies Anglo American and
default First Quantum Minerals Limited and
default Canadian companies with UK board members, shareholders and management Banro Resources, and Montero Mining. They were joined by NGOs including 
defaultPWYP, WWF, 
defaultAfricare, Internati
defaultonal Alert
default (
defaultGlobal Witness dropped out days before the event
default)
default. Ministers from six African countries including Ghana, Rwanda and South Sudan attended alongside James Duddridge and Eric Joyce
default MP
default. Other organisations participating included U
defaultnited Nations Econ
defaultomic Council for Africa
default, EITI,
default 
defaultInternational Council on Metals and Mining
default, 
defaultThe International Institute for the Environment and Development
default and UKTI.
defaultIn 2014 the event will also feature a focus on the development of regional infrastructure, precipitated by 
defaultthe need to support mining projects but, that also support community and agribusiness development in those areas. 
defaultAnglo American is a leader in sustainability and a good example of best practice
default among mining companies
default. The International Council on Metals 
defaultand Mining, an organisation sponsored by large mining companies, also sets many of the standards that the industry adheres to. The International Institute for the Environment and Development is a think-tank that leads much of the thinking around sustainabi
defaultlity issues.
default6.Does the UK have the skills base to remain a centre for the extractive industries and to ensure that UK based businesses benefit from potential future opportunities such as shale gas? defaultA lack of support for the industry, combined with lower 
defaultcommodity prices and the reduced ability to attract investment in the current global economic climate means that the UK industry skills base is diminishing. The numbers of geology and mining engineering students is reducing and those that do train often mi
defaultgrate to other mining jurisdictions where the industry is better supported, salaries are higher and jobs more plentiful – Western Australia, Canada and the Nordic regions.
default7.What is the impact of the industry of the UK signing up to the EITI?defaultThe signing o
defaultf the EITI by Cameron’s government in June has been very positive for the UK extractive industries.
default The signing puts the UK in the position of being a leader in accountability and transparency in the industry and helps to counteract any negative perception
defaults that may have been generated by the corporate governance issues previously mentioned; and hopefully goes some way to ensuring that they will never be repeated.
defaultIn t
defaulthe Nordic countries, often regarded as the leaders in ethical areas
default, Finland, Denmark and 
defaultSweden
default have made 
defaultannouncements
default in September
default that the UK’s stance on transparency has inspired them 
defaultto
default,
default 
default“quickly transpose the EU Accounting and Transparency Directive”
default,
default indicating that this is an area where the UK is seen to be setting the bar.
defaultAt the Mining On Top: Africa – London Summit, which was purposely timed to occur the week following the EITI signing at the G8 meeting, the African Mining Ministers were also 
defaultinspired by the UK’s lead, with Kenya declaring a commitment to sign up to the in
defaultitiative also.
default8.Would increased regulation for London listed extractives companies result in competition from elsewhere or can it be used to make the UK a centre of excellence for best practice and corporate governance?defaultAlthough increased regulation would
default, I am certain, be opposed by some parts of the industry, other
default part
defaults would welcome it as they are entirely committed to improving the global reputation of the
default mining
default industry. The fact that we are questioning the impact on 
defaultreputation of 
defaultcorporate governan
defaultce
default lapses
default indicates that the UK has a reputation 
defaultworth preserving. C
defaultompanies 
defaultwho have nothing to hide 
defaultare 
defaultnot put-off by increased regulation so long as it does not add too much expense and is not too onerous.
defaultDiffering
default levels of regulation 
defaultfor different 
defaultorganisations might be
default an effective approach. More complex and rigorous 
defaultregulation is required 
defaultfor the larger more complex
default 
defaultorganisations with more resources and 
defaultsimpler and 
defaultless time consuming for the smaller
default,
default less complex
default,
default cash strapped juniors.
default9.What isdefault the competitive landscape for the extractive industries in the 21st Century and is it in the UK’s interest to remain a global centre for them?defaultThe competitive landscape for extractives in the 21
defaultst
default century is complex. The demand story 
defaultmaintain
defaults as developi
defaultng nations continue urbanisation and the growing middle classes demand more, smaller, lighter technology and the developed world looks for greener alternatives. At the same time supply is increasingly controlled by less politically stable countries.
defaultProduc
defaulttion costs increase, metal prices fluctuate, shareholders 
defaultand governments 
defaultdemand higher returns 
defaultfrom the industry 
defaultand companies concentrate on cost reduction. The large projects are being abandoned by the majors, the junior explorers are struggling to rais
defaulte cash for their activities and consolidation is occurring as the majority of companies have less than one year’s cash remaining
default (IntierraRMG)
default.
defaultAll these factors point to future undersupply and 
defaultincreased competition for resources. Whilst the boom days of c
defaultommodities may be over, returns are still significant and, as previously noted the industry delivers returns f
defaultar beyond the immediate mining companies
default.  
defaultThe UK must ensure a place at the centre of the industry in order to secure metal supplies and to 
defaultprotect the income and jobs that contribute so significantly to the UK economy.
defaultRos C Lund (Ms)
default22 September 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default