EIS 15
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Cleveland Potash LtddefaultClevelan
defaultd Potash 
defaultLtd 
default(CPL) 
defaultowns and operates a potash mine (Boulby Mine)
default on the north east coast of Yorkshire.  
defaultThe company
default nominally mine 3 mtpa potash ore (sylvite &amp; sylvinite) and refine this into 1mtpa potash (MOP = 95% KCl (60% K
default2
defaultO)) mainly used in the fertiliser industry. Although 
defaultCPL
default produce enough potash to satisfy the
default UK demand, 
defaultthe company 
defaultonly suppl
defaulties
default about half this market with the remainder being imported from Germany, Russia and Canada.
default Consequently 
defaultCPL
default export large tonnages of potash to 
defaultsome European customers as well as competing for sales worldwide.
default  
defaultIn order
default to access the potash ore deposit, permanent roadways 
defaultare mined 
defaultin underlying salt (Halite (95% NaCl)) producing about 800 ktpa of co-product that is mostly sold to local authorities and highway authorities as de-icing salt. 
defaultIn recent years a new access r
defaultoadway 
defaulthas been driven 
defaultinto the underlying polyhalite seam and 
defaultCPL is
default the only mine in the world producing this mineral 
defaultthat 
defaulthas a value as a fertiliser
default mineral.
default 
defaultCPL contrib
defaultutes £225M per year economic activity as measured by product sales
default and much more by other economic measures
default.  Much of 
defaultthe
default vendor spend is local
default,
default supporting many small suppliers and service companies.  Half 
defaultthe company’s 
defaultsales are overseas with approximate 
defaultforeign earnings of £100M
default+
default per year.
defaultAlthough 
defaultCPL
default employ approximately 900 persons in high quality jobs, a further 150 full time contract
defaultor
default employ
defaultees
default work at the mine
default, totalling over 1
default,
default050 persons. 
defaultAll direct employees are employed at our Boulby Mine 
defaultand the
default nearby export terminal on the river Tees. A socio-economic study of 
defaultCPL’s
default impact suggested and confirmed that 
defaultthe mine s
defaultupport
defaults
default approximately 4,000 up-stream and down-stream jobs with a predominantly regional impact.  At any one time, the equivalent of t
defaulthree
default full time employees are travelling the world for meetings with parent company, suppliers, customers, trade bodies
default, conferenc
defaultes and other representations.
default 
defaultCPL
default 
defaultnote 
defaultthat the decline of the UK extracti
defaultve industry means that the UK is no longer a centre for extractive industries.  The decline of mining and quarrying activities has had a knock-on effect with a decline in UK suppliers of 
defaultessential 
defaultproducts such as mining machinery and day to day equipment 
defaultthat increasingly have to be sourced outside the UK and even outside Europe. 
defaultNot at all. Increa
defaultsingly the expertise for extractive industry in the UK 
defaulthas been retired or made redundant or unemployed so that it has become difficult
default,
default if not impossible
default,
default to recruit suitably qualified personnel 
defaultfrom this country. T
defaulthose mining companies
default that 
defaulthave working mines in the UK 
defaulthave almost all 
defaultbeen 
defaulttaken over by foreign owned companies
default that are quoted on markets other than London
default.  
defaultThe UK has reputational risk because of the cost driven quality of their environmental impact assessments for
default their operations.  
defaultThe knowledge b
defaultase of the financial institutions needs to be much greater so they can understand 
defaultthe complex 
defaulttechnical and environmental issues rather than
default a 
defaultn
defaulta
defaultïve
default superficial knowledge
default. 
defaultCPL has many interactions with the NGO sector 
defaulttake great 
defaultpride in the high level of local and regional knowledge and understanding of 
defaultthe mine’s
default operations as we
defaultll as the very low level of objections to new or renewed licence applications.
default 
defaultAlthough not the 
defaultNGO
default sector
default, CPL at its Boulby Mine is hosting an increasingly internationally significant range of research activities that utilises the ultra-low radiation ba
defaultckground to be found in the mine as well as its great depth (1,100m) which attenuates solar radiation by a factor 106.  
defaultCPL h
defaultave hosted the STFC funded UK Dark Matter search since 1985 but recently the range of activities  have been expanded under the 
defaultSTFC
default 
defaultFutures Programme to include
default:-
default 
defaultThis is in addition to 
defaultthe company’s 
defaultown long term joint research project with Durham University investigating mining subsidence and coastal eros
defaultion and the range of natural and anthropomorphic influences upon this important natural phenomenon.  Cost effective methods of wide area monitoring have been investigated and models constructed of the mechanisms for cliff recession that have worldwide impl
defaultications. Recent additional interest in this unique research space has the potential to widen the scope of research even further with implications for UK plc Intellectual Property and that may bring additional benefits for underground operations worldwide.
defaultNo – the skills base for the extractive industry worldwide is diminishing with the UK seemingly setting the lead in that decline. 
defaultCPL 
defaultare finding it increasingly difficult to recruit suitably qualified persons in the UK and increa
defaultsingly applicants for mana
defaultgement
default positions 
defaultare from mining areas in other parts of the world with Commonwealth and European countries predominating.  Technical positions are increasingly attracting applicants from those mining areas of Europe that are contracting through re-structu
defaultring.  
defaultAlthough most of 
defaultthe 
defaultmining staff are “home grown” 
defaultwith 
defaultover 400 
defaultstaff 
defaultwith 25 year long-service awards and several with 40 year service
default awards
default, 
defaultthe company 
defaultrecently recruited several miners from a UK coal mine that was closing, in advance of the n
defaulteed for such staff.  This allows the opportunity to re-train them in potash mining techniques in time for 
defaultlocal
default needs.  
defaultI
defaultt 
defaultis 
defaultincreasingly difficult to recruit “green miners” locally and regionally.
default 
defaultCPL has no objections or comments regarding shale gas op
defaulterations but would like to draw the Select Committee’s attention to the possibility that shale gas operations have the potential to compromise working mines. This may happen by injudicious opening of faults and fractures that could possibly act as conduits
default for gas or liquids to enter mine workings that hitherto were immune from such activity.  There is a strong case that shale gas and fracking operations 
defaultshould not take place within 10km of working mines
default (although this distance could be reduced if better kn
defaultowledge about the shale gas operation and its impact on the existing mine workings was available)
default.
defaultEITI has absolutely no impact on CPL
default’s 
defaultoperations that exceed 
defaultall 
defaultthe EITI criteria 
defaultbut 
defaultfrom 
defaultthe
default position as a player in the global mining industry
default,
default 
defaultthe UK signing up to 
defaultEITI is welcome.
default 
defaultSome London listed companies are exemplars of environmentally acceptable mining operations around the world, others are less so.
defaultExtractive industry outputs are 
defaultincreasingly 
defaultbecoming international commodities and indigenous industries are being bought up by foreign companies 
defaultseeking 
defaultglobal market 
defaultpositions
default.  Increasingly foreign ownership spells 
defaultuncertainty for the UK operations
default that can be reduced by more government support to this sector
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultDavid Pybus, External Affairs Manager.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.iclfertilizers.com/Fertilizers/ClevelandPotash/Pages/BUHomepage.aspx
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.polysulphate.com/index.php
default 
default