EIS 16
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Crown Estatedefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Crown Estate welcomes the opportunity to 
defaultrespond to this 
defaultinquiry
default on the 
defaultextractive industries sector
default. 
defaultThe statements contained in this 
defaultresponse
default are
default grounded
default in The Crown Estate’s 
defaultinterests, land ownership and as largest minerals landlord of the UK
default. 
defaultThe Crown Estate is a 
defaultcommercially-run, 
defaulttotal return
default,
default active asset management business
default,
default 
defaultoversee
defaulting
default 
defaulta UK-wide
default portfolio of
default prime urban, rural
default, coastal
default and 
defaultoffshore 
defaultproperty. In line with our core values, we actively manage these to deliver a c
defaultommercial return, which is paid each year to the Treasury for the benefit of the nation. We 
defaultare committed to 
defaultcareful 
defaultstewa
defaultrdship of the assets we have been trusted to manage.
default 
defaultThe Crown Estate is g
defaultov
defaulterned by an Act of Parliament, T
defaulthe Crown Estate Act 1961
default. I
defaultt has a public remit whilst at the same time being independent from Government – a statutory corporation
default,
default run on a comme
defaultrcial basis.
default 
defaultWe are committed to working with government departments, stakeholders and industry in helping to manage the coastal and marine environment
default, in line with our commercial remit
default.
defaultOur rural and marine assets 
defaultcomprise
default:
default 
defaultAs with Mines Royal, we are not involved in the physical process of mining, but we license 
defaultsuch activity. In recent years we have invested in new operations with the purchase of mineral interests at Cauldon Low in Staffordshire and Nether Murthat in Scotland.
default Our responsibility for Mines Royal determines the need for o
defaultur permission to remove Cro
defaultwn gold in any form. We currently have four Mines Royal production leases, including one active gold mine in Northern Ireland.
defaultWith these interests combined, this makes The Crown Estate the largest minerals landlord in the UK. 
defaultIt is important to be clear t
defaulthat The Crown Estate has no rights over UK hydrocarbons, such as Shale Gas, which accrue to ‘the Crown’ but are vested in the Department for Energy and Climate Change. In this context we are no different to any other landowner. 
defaultHaving reviewed the 
defaultquestio
defaultns posed in the 
defaultinquiry
default, 
defaultwe have addressed 
defaultonly 
defaultsome 
defaultof the 
defaultspecific 
defaultquestions 
defaultwith
default relevance to our role
default. We believe other organisations such as the Minerals Producers Association
default (MPA)
default and CBI Minerals Group are best placed to comment in other areas.
default&#xa0;
defaultQudefaultestion default1default:default  What is the contribution to the UK economy of extractive industries in the UK?defaultIt is important at the outset to recognise the 
defaultrole
default and impact
default that terrestrial planning policy has on 
defaultmarine minerals
default. This is particularly true in areas where 
defaultland 
defaultbased
default minerals are under local 
defaultplanning pressures
default which restricts supply
default,
default allowing m
defaultarine minerals
default a greater market share.
default 
defaultIt is therefore very important to e
defaultnsu
defaultre
default 
defaultthat terrestrial 
defaultplanning policy specifically references consideration of marine 
defaultminerals as
default way of
default maximising the potential of this indigenous resource.
defaultW
defaulthilst minerals guidance is set out under the National Planning Policy Framework, with local aggregates assessments undertaken by Local Authorities, consideration of other sources, such as marin
defaulte minerals (which are outside of 
defaultthe 
defaultspatial demarcation
default of a Local Authority)
default is needed as part of broader supply chain considerations. 
defaultC
defaultlear policy guidance 
defaultensuring 
defaultthat 
defaultmarine minerals
default contribution continues
default,
default 
defaultin the context of UK supply of minerals, 
defaultth
defaultis 
defaultwill
default maximise 
defaultthe overall
default benefit
default to the UK economy
default.
defaultA robust regulatory regime exists
default for marine aggregates
default, which is managed through the Marin
defaulte
default Management Organisation
default 
default(MMO) 
default(England)
default and
default Natural Resources Wales (Wales)
default.
default 
default There is currently no extraction in Scottish or Northern Irish waters.
default Operating businesses in this sector have a significant capital asset base to maintain, requiring security of mineral reserves
default, and it is 
defaultimportant that the 
defaultMarine Licence 
defaultapplication p
defaultrocedure
default recognises the long term nature 
defaultand scale 
defaultof the associated investment profile
default without 
defaultintroducing an excessive burden on the 
defaultindustry
default. 
default 
defaultThe Crown Estate has introduced a procedure designed to optimise the use of the seabed whilst working within 
defaultthe guidelines introduced by the marine planning process that is currently being developed by the MMO. This procedure is also designed to provide a safeguarding protocol for key resources.
defaultThe 
defaultMPA
default recently commissioned 
defaulta study
default to assess the contribution the mineral products sector (pr
defaultincipally minerals extracted to
default supply the 
defaultconstruction sector) makes to 
defaultthe UK economy
default and would be able to provide conclusions outlining the Gross Value Added (GVA) contribution the sector makes 
defaultto the UK economy.
defaultAlongside the economic contribution minerals production makes to the UK, it is also important to recognise the need for 
defaulta 
defaultsecure supply
default of minerals for the construction industry
default.
default Millions of tons of marine sand and gravel are used across the construction industry and for coastal management and land reclamation each year. 
defaultThe Crown Estate licens
defaultes nearly all marine seabed sand and gravel resourc
defaultes lying offshore around the UK
default;
default and
default has 
defaultbeen licensing the activity 
defaultfor 
defaultover 50 years
default. 
defaultExtraction of about 20 million tonnes p
defaulter 
defaulta
defaultnnum
default of marine aggregates 
defaultoccurs 
defaultoff the
default coast of England and Wales.
defaultAs set out in the Marine Policy Statement
default for the UK, m
defaultarine mineral from UK seabed is v
defaultiew
defaulted as a world class resource.
default It is an important source for security of supply and there is always the potential opportunity to export our dredged materials to other countries in Europe
default.
defaultAs we adapt to cl
defaultimate change, large volumes of 
defaultmarine sand and grave
defaultls are used in beach replenishment schemes. Aggregates are pumped directly from dredgers onto beaches,
default providing coastal protection, 
defaulte
defaultnhancing the amenity value and 
defaultproviding security to the local economy, for example on the coast of Lincolnshire.
defaultIn addit
defaultion, marine sands are used in land reclamation schemes, infilli
defaultng areas in ports and harbours 
defaultto reclaim land from the sea. Recent examples of reclamation include the runway extension at Ronaldsway airport on The Isle of Man and the London Gateway port dev
defaultelopment
default. 
defaultIt is important to note here that sourcing of marine based minerals ensure that the schemes undertaken are 
defaulteconomically viable 
defaultand it is likely that without these vital resource
defaults
default,
default this would not be the case. 
defaultMarine sourced mineral is unique in te
defaultrms of the ability to import and place large quantities of mineral in a short space of time without the need for importation by road.
default 
defaultThe Crown Estate is 
defaultalso 
defaultresponsible for leasing extraction of minerals lying below the UK sea bed, including deposits of
default potash.
default 
defaultPotash is a generic term for a variety of potassium bearing minerals; in part
defaulticular it is Sylvinite that is
default currently
default 
defaultmined in the UK. Around 90 per cent of UK potash is used in the production of fertiliser with the remainder being used in the che
defaultmical 
defaultand pharmaceutical industries. 
defaultApproximately 60 per cent of all UK production is exported each year.
default 
defaultThe Boulby potash mine, situated on the North Yorkshire coast, is the UK's only commercial potash mine and the most important non-hydrocarbon minera
defaultl operation in Britain. The mine, which started production in 1973 and is currently managed by Cleveland Potash Ltd, employs 
defaultaround
default 
default1100 workers (another 200 workers 
defaulthave been recruited 
defaultthis year, some of 
defaultwhich
default have come from closed coal mi
defaultnes). Mining ope
defaultrations extend 
defaultaro
defaultund 8 km offshore and 
defaultthe mine
default is the s
defaultecond deepest in Europe (approx
defaultimately
default 1km below sea level).
defaultBoulby mine
default produces in the order of 3 million tonnes per annum (mtpa) potash ore and refines this into 1mtpa potash mainly used in the fe
defaultr
defaulttiliser industry. Although the c
defaultompany produces enough potash to satisfy the UK demand, 
defaultthey supply about half of the UK
default market with the remainder being imported from 
defaultoverseas
default.  
defaultThe
default rock salt
default also mined
default 
default(in order to access the potash ore) is mostly sold t
defaulto Local A
defaultuthorities and
default the Highway A
defaultuthorities
default (with 
defaultproduc
defaulttion in the order of
default about 0.8 mtpa
default)
default as de-icing salt
default for roads
default. 
defaultThe Company contributes £225M per year of economic activity as measured by product sales.  They support many local small suppliers
default and service companies.  Half their sales are overseas with approximate foreign earnings of £100M per year.
defaultDuring 2011, York Potash 
defaultsigned an agreement with us for the rights to explore f
defaultor polyhalite under the seabed 
defaultto the south of Boulby and exploratio
defaultn is underway. 
defaultYork Potash has determined 
defaultthe existence of considerable reserves
default both under the land and under the seabed, and is in the process of carrying out resear
defaultc
defaulth to support an 
defaultapplication to
default 
defaultNorth York Moors National Park 
defaultfor land based mining oper
defaultations and associated surface workings
default.
default 
default 
defaultA decision is expected in 2014
default. 
defaultThe MMO has already 
defaultgranted
default 
defaultpermission for the offshore element.
defaultQuestion default2default:default  How do the UK-based extractive industries support employment a) in the UK and b) for UK citizens overseas?defaultWhilst The Crown Estate has previously commissioned and published work related to the analysis of socio economic indicators of marine related activ
defaultities in the UK economy (ISBN978-1-906410-01-8), 
defaultthe MPA have information available regarding the role the extractive industries more broadly play in supporting employment
default, as highlighted in our response to question 1
default. 
defaultWe estimate that t
defaulthere are approximat
defaultely 3,000 people 
defaultdirectly 
defaultemployed in the extraction
default and processing
default of marine minerals (
defaultmarine 
defaultaggregates and potash)
default, with many more jobs involved indirectly through downstream and upstream activities.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion default6default:default  Is there sufficient engagement between defaultUK extractive industries and the NGO sector? Are there examples of best practice in engagement between the extractive industries and NGOs?defaultThe Crown Estate has sought to 
defaultfurther develop 
defaultour relationship
defaults
default with non-governmental organisations (NGOs) with resp
defaultect to the activities that we lease and license. We feel that as our role has become more proactive in the development of our portfolios of activities and management of 
defaultthe 
defaultestate, so too has the improvement in the relationship with relevant NGOs.
defaultThe Crow
defaultn Estate funds and supports the Seabed Users and Developers Group (SUDG). The SUDG is an informal grouping of industry sectors whose participants have a common interest in sustainable development within the UK’s marine environment. The Crown Estate works w
defaultith SUDG to align seabed user groups across the UK to work positively with Government to prepare shared understanding and approaches to marine management. Organisations involved include sectors whose members require marine licenses for construction and ope
defaultration include British Ports Association, United Kingdom Major Ports Association, British Marine Aggregates Producers Association
default (the minerals trade association)
default, British Marine Federation, Oil &amp; Gas UK, Renewable Energy Association, Renewable UK, Subsea 
defaultCables UK and Carbon Capture and Storage Association. 
defaultIn October 2012, SUDG published a joint statement
default with 
defaultthe Marine Conservation Society, RSPB, The Wildlife Trusts and WWF to work collaboratively on marine conservation in relation to seabed uses. 
defaultThe
default SUDG positively engages with environmental NGOs through this forum.
defaultThe Crown Estate also works very closely with BMAPA to develop best practice and enhance knowledge and understanding of the sector. 
defaultWe have commissioned studies in a number of areas, whic
defaulth have been published and placed in the public domain. 
defaultAn example of these joint initiatives is “The Area Involved” reports. These are published annually as a result of a March 1999 statement of intent between The Crown Estate and BMAPA committing to revi
defaultewing all dredging licences over a rolling five year period. Included was a commitment to surrender areas no longer containing useful resources of sand and gravel and to publish an annual report detailing the extent of dredging within the licensed areas. T
defaulthis year’s report which is to be published shortly is the 15th in the on-going series, and has drawn widespread acknowledgement for the level of information and transparency provided.
defaultAnother example of work undertaken to 
defaulthighlight the sustainable credenti
defaultals of the marine aggregates sector
default is our involvement in
default developing an industry protocol for the reporting of marine archaeology, and we provide annual analysis of the area of seabed affected by marine mineral extraction. Much of this information is available through our web site (
defaulthttp://www.thecrownestate.co.uk/energy-infrastructure/research/
default).
defaultIn many of these areas the 
defaultmarine aggregates 
defaultsector is acknowledged as being a leader amongst the extractive industries and as a consequence
default recognises a significantly improved relationship with many NGOs.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion default10default:default What is the competitive landscape for the extractive industries in the 21st Century and is it in the UK’s interest to remain a global centre for them?defaultThe competitive landsca
defaultpe for the UK building materials industry has altered over the last decade following the acquisition of UK companies by global organisations for whom cement production is a core activity (e.g. – purchase of Hanson by Heidelberg Cement, RMC by Cemex, 
defaultand Ag
defaultgregate
default Industries by Holcim).
default&#xa0;
defaultThis industry wide consolidation has led to greater integration of UK and European suppliers and competition for available capital investment. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe low value
default of some minerals (e.g. aggregates) means that local markets remain a feature for 
defaultmost 
defaultsuppliers that do not have the ability to take advantage of rail or sea logistics. Marine minerals are in a position to take advantage of cro
defaultss
default border trade, with around
default 
defaulta third
default 
defaultof marine aggregates and
default half 
defaultof potash supplies being exported.
defaultWe trust that you will find these comments 
defaulthelpful and 
defaultconstructive. 
defaultWe would be very willing to provide additional information on any of the points we have raised above
default and be very pleased to discuss these matters with you further
default. 
defaultThrough the 
defaultEnergy &amp; Infrastructure’s 
defaultMinerals &amp; Infrastructure
default team
default, w
defaulte are ready to engage in further discussions on these and other points relevant to our ownership or which our expertise m
defaultay be brought to bear.
default All of this response may be put into the public domain and there is no part of it that should be treated as confidential.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultThe Crown Estate has no rights over UK hydrocarbons, such as Shale Gas, which accrue to ‘the Crown’ but are vested in the
default 
defaultDepartment for Energy and Climate Change. In this context we are no different to any other landowner. 
default&#xa0;
default Capital Economics economic study: 
defaulthttp://www.mineralproducts.org/feature_ce_report.
defaulthtml
default Marine Policy Statement: 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-marine-policy-statement
default 
default The joint statement can be found on the SUDG website: 
defaulthttp://www.sudg.org.uk/downloads.php
default 
default