EIS 22
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultOil &amp; Gas UKdefaultIntroductiondefaultOil &amp;
default Gas UK is the principal trade association for the offshore oil and gas exploration and production industry in the United Kingdom, with more than 370 member companies, comprising oil and gas operators and investors and a broad spectrum of the supply chain:
default contractors, suppliers, law firms and consultants.  We 
defaultw
defaultelcome
default the opportunity to respond to 
defaultthis
default 
defaultBusiness, Innovation and Skills Committee
default’s 
defaultinquiry into the Extractive Industries Sector.
defaultAs a trade association for the UK’s offshore oil and gas industry,
default our answers will be in this context and will not include information on the UK extractive industry more widely.
default Further, we have only answered the questions which we are in a position to provide information.
defaultThe UK’s offshore oil and gas industry paid c£6.5bn in production taxes in 2012-2013, and UK
default 
defaultC
defaultontinental 
defaultS
defaulthelf (UKCS)
default production supports the UK’s Balance of Trade by c£32bn per year.
default 
defaultIn addition to this, the wider oil and 
defaultgas supply chain is estimated to have paid 
defaulta further 
default£5bn in corporation and payroll tax.
default 
defaultCapital investment in new fields in 2013 alone will rise to a record £13.5bn. Total capital investment committed to projects already in production or under developme
defaultnt totalled £44bn at the start of 2013, £13bn higher than 12 months earlier.
defaultIndeed, whilst subdued production and record investment have driven tax revenues down in the short-term, the contribution from oil and gas production was still over 15 per cent of
default the Exchequer’s total receipts of corporation tax.
defaultThe
default UK oil and gas
default industry support
defaults
default some 450,000 jobs, many of which are highly skilled, across the whole economy. Of these, 36,
default000 are employed by operating companies 
default(12,500 of whom work
default offshore); 200,000 are employed in the supply chain (45,000
default of whom work offshore); 112,000 in jobs induced by the economic activity of the above employees, and; 100,000 in the export of goods and services.
defaultAs mentioned above, related exports from the UK’s oil and gas industry support some 100,000 jobs, with £7bn of the supply chain’s £27bn contribution to the UK economy being 
defaultmade up o
defaultf exports. The UK’s subsea engineering sector is a world leader, capturing 45 per cent of the global market.
defaultThe recent 
defaultScottish Council for Development
default and
default Industry’s 2011-12 Survey of International
default 
defaultActivity in Scotland’s Oil a
defaultnd
default 
defaultGas Sector
default estimated that
default 
defaultScotland’s
default 
defaultsupply chain totalled
default 
default£17.2bn
default 
defaultin
default 
default2011,
default growing 
defaultby
default 5.8 
defaultper
default c
defaultent
default 
defaultfrom
default 
default2010.
default 
defaultI
defaultnternati
defaultonal
default sales 
defaultincreased
default 
defaultby
default 8.4
default 
defaultper cent
default 
defaultto £8.2
default billion
default in 2011, with North America remaining the 
defaultmain
default export
default market. Scotti
defaultsh
default exports to
default Norway, 
defaultAngola, Nigeria an
defaultd the UAE are also strong
default.
defaultThe export of subsea goods and services from the UK is valued
default at 
default£4.4 bn. Key markets are Norway, West Africa, North America and Asia. Engineering and manufacturing companies generate a substantial share of this revenue, as do se
defaultrvice providers in disciplines such as diving, remotely operated vehicle inspection, underwater construction, installation and surveying.
defaultThe relationship between where a company is listed and their global footprint can be a complex one. 
defaultHowever, 
defaultit is our view
default that the UK’s competitive position is strengthened by our members who 
defaultare 
defaultlisted in the UK and who also have overseas business interest.
defaultCompanies that fall into this category have an improved ability to source expertise and technology from the international market and bring it back to the UK, which allows access to the best
default available practices and processes. Further, the UK supply chain that is utilised by these companies can, in turn, get access to international markets that they may otherwise struggle to exploit.
default This, in turn, has a direct benefit on the UK’s competitive 
defaultposition in the international oil and gas sector.
defaultIn addition to very high levels of activity 
defaulton the UKCS
default, the
default UK oil and gas
default industry is competing globally for people with the skills and expertise required to deliver 
defaultthe planned developments abroad. Adding to these pressures, 
defaultcompanies from Australia, Ca
defaultnada and the Middle East, for example, rec
defaultruit from the UK regularly, and multinational companies will deploy their UK personnel overseas to open up developments in new areas, reflecting how highly valued North Sea expertise is.
defaultThis global shortage is mos
defaultt acute at mid-career engineer level, with virtually all disciplines affected, and is making it increasingly difficult to deliver 
defaultoffshore 
defaultproject
defaults on time and 
defaultwithin budget
default. Further
default, the shortage of skilled personnel is resulting in a wage spiral which is
default increasing lifting costs in what is already a relatively expensive basin.
defaultThe industry recognises it is essential to grow the size of its talent pool and, in addition to well established graduate and apprenticeship schemes, is looking at ways of bringing 
defaultin mature hires from other sectors, in particular from the military services.  However, this also requires time for transitional training and development of competence.
defaultWith increased competition for these resources resulting from the development of the on
defaultshore oil and gas industry, 
defaultt
defaulthere is a very real chance that this could have a detrimental impact on the UK’s ability to full exploit future opportunities such as shale gas.
defaultOil &amp; Gas UK
default, on behalf of the UK’s offshore oil and gas industry, fully supports the principles of transparency and openness on which EITI was established. The oil and gas industry paid £6.5bn of direct production taxes to the UK Exchequer in 2012/13 on top of the wi
defaultder economic benefits that the UK gains from domestic oil and gas production. Oil &amp; Gas UK feel that there are significant benefits to be gained from civil society having a greater awareness of the contribution our industry makes.
defaultEITI was designed for res
defaultource rich countries that have significant governance issues surrounding the use of funds arising from their mineral wealth. It is worth noting that these concerns are absent in the UK context, and a significant amount of data is already collected by Gover
defaultnment agencies and published online to provide transparency about the total amount of direct tax revenues that the oil and gas industry pays each year. Given this, Oil &amp; Gas UK fully supports the use of existing data returns to minimise the admin burden th
defaultat any additional requirements that EITI could bring.
defaultThe UK’s adoption of EITI is still in its infancy, with the first meeting of the Multi Stakeholder Group (MSG) planned for October 2013. Until more is known about how the EITI will be implemented in the
default UK it is difficult for Oil &amp; Gas UK, or its member companies to offer much insight about what impact the initiative may have in the future. We do offer some general opinions and wishes which we hope will be borne in mind by the MSG and the Committee:
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe 
defaultcompliance burden placed on industry by EITI must be minimised as far as possible. Additional data being required or expected from companies must be proportionate to the benefits the additional insights give ‘civil society’ groups. 
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultCompanies of all sizes 
defaultshould be able to manage the demands placed upon them by the EITI process without materially affecting their UK based business. Otherwise EITI will become a factor in reducing the competitiveness of extracting oil and gas from the UK and its territorial wa
defaultters.
default3)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultInformation requested under EITI, and published publicly, should be at the appropriate reporting level, and must not compromise commercial positions of the reporting companies or risk being anti-competitive in nature.
defaultSome UK-listed companies have co
defaultnsiderable experience of implementing EITI in other countries and have found it a beneficial process in terms of transparency it brings to the industry in individual countries and the engagement it engenders between stakeholders on key questions affecting 
defaultthe extractive sector.
defaultIf the UK joining EITI encourages wider adoption of EITI principles, leading to improved governance and reduced levels of corruption internationally there could be a benefit to those UK-listed companies who operate in the countries c
defaultoncerned. 
defaultThis would depend on the regulation. If 
defaultthe additional regulation was designed to encourage investment, incentivise innovation or 
defaultwas
default a consolidation of existing regulations in an attempt to make compliance more efficient
default,
default then these could potentially have the impact of making the UK a more competitive and, therefore, attractive place to do business.
defaultHowever, 
defaultit should be understood that 
defaultt
defaulthe oil and gas industry is truly international
default 
defaultand w
defaulthen companies are looking to inves
defaultt the regulator
defaulty
default environment is one of the key considerations. 
defaultWe oppose regulation for regulation’s sake and do not believe that the amount of regulation should be a consideration but, rather, 
defaultfocus should be on the creation of proportionate, evidenced b
defaultased and applicable regulation.
defaultThe UK oil and gas industry
default will remain of
default s
defaultignificant economic importance for many decades. With the development of subsea engineering and decommissioning, the UK is 
defaultparticularly
default well placed to continue to export these expertise – with the UK economy
default more widely
default enjoying all the associated benefits
default.
defaultConclusiondefaultWe trust that this submission is helpful to the Committee’s inquiry.  If there are any queries relating to our submission, please do not hesitate to contact us.
default23 September 2013
default&#xa0;
default