EIS 24defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultCarbon Trackerdefault defaultResilience to c
defaultlimate change risk is central to good corporate gove
defaultrnance of the extractive industries sector
defaultAbout Carbon TrackerdefaultCarbon Tracker is a non-profit organisation working to align the capital markets with the climate change policy agenda. We are applying our thinking on carbon budgets and stranded assets across geographies and asset classes to inform investor thinking and 
defaultthe regulation of capital markets. We are funded by a number of US and UK charitable foundations. 
defaultIntroductiondefaultCarbon Tracker welcomes the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills’ decision
default to open a discussion about current issues surrounding the 
defaultext
defaultractive industries sector
default. Broadly, we see the current 
defaultexposure
default of extractives companies listed on the London Stock Exchange 
default(LSE) 
defaultto be undermining London’s position as a global financial centre of excellence. Furthermore, our research 
defaultreveals a system
defaultic risk sitting on the world’s capital markets due to 
defaultthe mismatch between climate change policy and the business models of these extractives companies. This could lead to significant value de
defaultstruction for investors if the 
default‘carbon bubble’ 
defaultwere to burst
default.
defaultWe
default see this period of reflection for the London Stock Exchange
default after a number of controversies
default to be an opportunity to marry improvements in both the corporate governance and awareness of climate change ri
defaultsk within 
defaultinvestors in 
defaultthe extractive
default industr
defaulties sect
defaultor
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat are the corporate governance concerns raised by the number of extractive industries companies listed in the UK? Are there reputational risks for the UK and UK financial institutions in being a centre for such businesses?defaultC
defaultompanies come to the LSE to benefit from the UK’s respected corporate governance regime. 
defaultT
defaulthe combination of growth and good governance should, in theory, represent a compelling proposition for investors.
default However, t
defaulthe UK 
defaulthas 
defaultfailed to 
defaultevolve its
default governance 
defaultstandards 
defaultto reflect this new type of risk – that the changing energy sector will see significant shifts in value.  Instead London has seen increasing exposure to companies
default in the extractives industry during the recent commodities boom. 
default 
defaultThese companies do
default not represent best practice in terms of corporate governance or addressing climate risk. Two very recent examples demonstrate this fact.
defaultThe
default 
defaultEurasian Natural Resources Corporation (
defaultENRC
default)
default was one of several companies that the UK listings authority allowed 
defaultto list on the LSE even though it
defaults
default free float of shares was below the usual 25% threshold. 
defaultThis decision 
defaulthas 
defaultsince 
defaultcome into
default question amid 
defaultallegations of corruption, bribery and a criminal investigation
default as its value plummeted from £13bn to £3bn resulting in huge shareholder loss
default– in essence, those behind the group failed to meet the standards of a public company.
defaultThe second reputational hit on the LSE involved Bumi PLC
default,
default described as ‘the biggest corpora
defaultte scandal to hit London for two decades’ by the Wall Street Journal.
default 
defaultIt has been 
defaultrevealed that Bumi was sitting on unaccounted payments of $201m – investors’ expectations about corporate governance at Bumi, assumed from being listed on the LSE, were not 
defaultmet. Bumi
default’s shares 
defaulthave
default fallen 
defaultby a quarter in value.
defaultThese cases have dealt a huge blow to the reputation of London as a centre for excellence in business. However, in spite of these warning signs, London continues to encourage extractives companies to it
defaults exchange. Glencore/X
defaults
defaulttrata recently
default listed on the LSE and Sibanthracite have documented they will be listing here soon
default, with Mongolian coal companies set to follow
default. 
defaultCorporate governance as a practice is designed to have the long-term security of a corpo
defaultration at its core. Therefore, misdemeanours in c
defaultorporate governance often run through into the 
defaultfundamental 
defaultbusiness models of these companies, meaning 
defaultLondon may not just be 
defaultvulnerable to reputational hits
default, but investors’ value and market integrity could 
defaultbe at risk also
default.
default 
defaultF
defaultor example,
default Bumi’s business mode
defaultl 
defaultrelies on exporting poor quality coal to China
default, but is that
default viable on an ongoing basis given 
defaultrecent 
defaultChinese announcements 
defaulton tackling
default air quality and carbon intensity? 
defaultHas the boom in London-listed extdefaultractive companies with businesses overseas over the last two decades resulted in a strengthening in the UK’s competitive position in the sector?defaultLondon
default’s boom in listed extractive companies 
defaultcould position
default it at a significant comp
defaultetitive disadvantage in the
default future
default. 
defaultCarb
defaulton Tracker’s research 
defaultreveals the potential for significant value-destruction of 
defaultthe fossil fuel
default assets 
defaulton which the business models of the
default corporations rely
default 
defaultat the hands of environmental regulation
default and market forces
default. The LSE is 
defaultnot currently 
defaultfactoring 
defaultthis risk
default into its corporate governance requirements of listings regulations.
defaultOur analysis 
defaultdemonstrates
default that there are more proven fossil fuel reserves listed on the world’s stock exchanges than can be burnt unmitigated if we 
defaultare to stay
default below 2
default°
defaultC 
defaultof global warming,
default 
default(the objective agreed in the Cancun Accord)
default,
default. 
defaultOur analysis has been confirmed 
defaultby the International
default Energy Agency who calculated 
defaultthat ‘without a significant deployment of CCS, more than two thirds of current proven fossil-fuel reserve
defaults cannot be commercialised in a 2°C world before 2050’
default, (based on
default a 50% chance 
defaultof limiting global warming to 2°C,). 
defaultLord Stern described it as a ‘profound contradiction between climate change policy and the valuations of listed companies’.
default 
defaultIn this conte
defaultxt, the risks of an over-relianc
defaulte on fossil fuels is apparent, yet 
defaultone fifth of the FTSE100 is mining and oil and gas firms, accounting for approximately 30% of the total market capitalisation. Carbon Tracker research found that the LSE has reserves listed
default on it equivalent to around 10 times the UK CO
default2
default budget between now and 2050 to keep within 2°C of global warming.
default Additionally, most of these reserves are located overseas exposing investors to decision-making and political processes around high carbon as
defaultsets in which they have no say. For example, a third of coal listed in London is located in Australia, a market 
defaultwhich exports 90% of its coal, and 
defaultwhere a number of factors are combining to raise costs and make their assets increasingly uncompetitive globa
defaultlly.
defaultLondon is also the primary listing for a number of oil and gas majors. These corporations are increasingly reliant on oil
default which is 
defaulthard to get at because almost all the most easily extractable reserves have been exploited. Essentially this means they
default are producing less and less oil for 
defaultevery dollar
default of shareholders’ funds invested
default.
default Alongside the corporate controversies which 
defaultcome with
default the sector - BP’s oil spills 
defaultat
default Macondo and Shell’s costly and contested drilling in the Arctic, for example – the LSE
default is housing companies exposing investors to an increasing level of risk that only provides returns at a high oil price. 
defaultIn this context, the LSE’s encouragement and 
defaultincentivisation to attract more extractives companies further inflates the carbon bubble a
defaultnd the potential downfall if it bursts.
default Companies are not currently required to provide analysis of sensitivity of their business to low demand, low price scenarios, which would see a number of companies with impaired assets
default that were no longer economic.
defaultWdefaultould increased regulation for London listed extractives companies result in defaultcompetitiondefault from elsewhere or can it be used to make the UK a centre of excellence for best practice and corporate governance?defaultWe feel increased regulation and requirements of 
defaultcompanies 
defaultcoming to London 
defaultto raise capital 
defaultis necessary to re-establish the UK and London as a reputable global financial centre. 
defaultOur research reveals climate change is a ri
defaultsk to a corporation’s 
defaultprosperity
default, yet there are no requirements from the UK listin
defaultgs authority or the LSE to disclose or even consider climate change in its business strategy. 
defaultFor example, in Glencore’s 1,637-page prospectus for its initial public offering to list on the LSE, just a single paragraph noted climate risk – ‘regulation of g
defaultreenhouse gas emissions could also have a material adverse effect on the demand for Glencore’s products’.
default This 
defaultboilerplate statement gives investors no idea of how significant company management consider the risk to be.
defaultMarkets need not be 
defaultresistant 
defaultto ch
defaultange
default;
default in fact their success relies on moving
default with the times and respond
defaulting
default to new risks, like climate change. Mining companies coming to the AIM market, a sub-market of the LSE, are encouraged to seek a Competent Persons report to verify the existence of 
defaultf
defaultossil fuel 
defaultreserves. This needs to be extended to consider 
defaultthe impacts of 
defaultclimate risk 
defaultfor reserves levels and 
defaultbusiness models as increasing emissions constraints come in and scaled up to the full LSE. UK Business Secretary, Vince Cable, supports being a f
defaultirst-mover by stating recently that ‘London can teach other centres how it [corpor
defaultate governance] should be done’, but needs to reflect this in actions.
defaultLondon has historically set the standards for other markets to follow, which has given it a competitiv
defaulte advantage due to the extra reputational benefits of listing in London. Unless London maintains this position, it will find itself having to compete more with other exchanges that have not built up the same historic reputation.
defaultWhat is the impact of the idefaultndustry of the UK signing up to the EITI?defaultThe LSE’s recent action to join the Extractives Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) takes important steps to 
defaultenhancing the exchange by 
defaultencouraging the disclosure
default of revenues from coal, oil and gas development.
default 
defaultThis reflects the requirements of the US Dodd Frank Act and EU Accountability requirements. It is also fitting, given the UK’s lead in establishing the EITI.
default 
defaultHowever revenue transparency only occupies a small part of what is required. 
defaultThe UK should take a
default similar leadership position on requiring climate risk disclosure, specifically with regards to the CO
default2
default potential of their fossil fuel reserves. This information would allow investors to track exposure to high-carbon assets themselves, and observe if this 
defaultwas increasing or decreasing over time. 
defaultOur research reveals the extent to which the LSE is exposed to over-valued and potentially worthless fossil fuel assets. Regula
defaulttion and listings rules 
defaultneed to
default 
defaultbe aligned with this threat
default 
defaultto
default maintain the UK’s position
default as a global standard-setter
default.
default 
defaultThe UK has le
defaultd with the Climate Change Act and setting carbon budgets; this needs to be transferred across to its oversight of London as a major global financial centre.
default 
defaultWithout having market wide information on the exposure 
defaultto this issue it will not be possible for 
defaultregulators or investors to understand the level of exposure in London. At present there is a risk that investors who track the market seeking diversification are in fact ending up with a concentration in fossil fue
defaultl based businesses.
defaultWhat is the competitive landscape for the extractive industries in the 21defaultstdefault Century and is it in the UK’s interest to remain a global centre for them? defaultThe landscape for the extractives industries going forward sees them having to adapt
default to a low-carbon energy future or be comprehensively uncompetitive as their market shrinks. This transition may take time but the signals are apparent
default. Analysts at Deutsche Bank, Goldman Sachs and Citi see the first step is for coal to 
defaultbe a poor investment
default,
default primarily due to environmental regulations, China peaking its demand and market forces favouring cheaper gas.
defaultUnlike countries like Norway, the UK does not have vast sovereign wealth funds to finance sustainable energy infrastructure for future generatio
defaultns. Ins
defaulttead it will be the UK’s financial mark
defaultets that will need to adapt – enhanced regulation and requirements can guide this transition
default. For the UK to remain competitive going forward is needs to be getting 
defaultahead in the growth industries of a low carbon
default future. Otherwise this opportunity will be capitalised on elsewhere. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/7b8716a6-0ef7-11e3-ae66-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2dFyOymGZ
default 
defaulthttp://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324880504578296122247181726.html
default 
default 
defaulthttp://unfccc.int/files/meetings/cop_16/application/pdf/cop16_l
defaultca.pdf
default  
default 
defaulthttp://www.carbontracker.org/linkfileshare/Unburnable-Carbon-Full-rev2.pdf
default 
defaulthttp
default://www.worldenergyoutlook.org/publications/weo-2012/
default 
defaulthttp://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/52f2709c-20f0-11e1-8a43-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2NsqYpw7h
default 
defaultwww.carbontracker.org/london
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.carbontracker.org/australia
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.economist.com/news/briefing/21582522-day-huge-integrated-international-oil-company-drawing
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/629f9a52-2283-11e2-b606-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk#axzz2AodKf6eB
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/3ec3eec8-ead6-11e2-9fcc-00144feabdc0.html
default 
default