EIS 26defaultWritten evidence submitted by World Vision (WV)defaultWorld Vision (WV) is the world’s largest overseas children’s charity. As a Christian relief, advocacy and development agency World Vision works in some of the world’s poorest communities and in the most fragile contexts, where we work with children, famili
defaultes and communities to overcome poverty and injustice. 
defaultWorld Vision welcomes the opportunity to submit evidence to the Select Committee for Business, Innovation and Skills Inquiry into the UK extractive industries. This submission is based on evidence from
default our overseas projects and programmes, which work with thousands of children who have experienced the worst forms of child labour working in dangerous conditions in the extractive industries. We limit our comments to this inquiry to the two questions which
default deal specifically with the corporate governance of UK extractive industries. 
defaultMost of the world’s biggest mining companies are listed on the London Stock Exchange. Outside of the USA, the London Stock Exchange has the largest share of companies in the extractive industries, representing
default 13% of the global market cap
default. UK companies produce two thirds of the world’s iron ore output and the majority of the world’s diamond, platinum and titanium production
default. The scale of the UK’s extractive industry market share means that UK companies and th
defaulte UK government have a responsibility to lead the world in terms of responsible corporate governance within these industries. 
defaultThere are clear reputational risks for the UK when UK companies fail to meet their corporate governance responsibilities. In 2011
default an oil spill from a Shell tanker caused extensive environmental damage on the Texas coastline. Shell faced strong criticism from the public and from the Obama Administration about its response to the crisis; almost all media reports into the oil spill ref
defaulterred to Shell specifically as UK 
defaultCompany
default, and the country was implicated in the oil spill crises by association. 
defaultThe extractive industries are responsible for the some of the worst abuses to children’s human rights. Globally, one million children work in
default small scale mining or quarrying
default. The International Initiative to End Child Labour (ILEC) reports that in June 2013 at least 10 children died having been crushed by collapsing rock or asphyxiated while working illegally on a gold mine 
defaultin Kamituga, in the 
defaulteastern part of the Democratic Republic of Congo
default.
default  World Vision’s own research, based on interviews with 
default53 children working in artisanal mining in the 
defaultKambove region of the DRC found that 1
default9 per cent of children said they had seen a child die on an 
defaultartisanal mining site, 67 per cent of the children experienced frequent 
defaultor persistent coughing and several girls reported experiencing genital infections after working waist-deep in acidic water
default.  
defaultChild mining is categorised as one of the worst forms of 
defaultchild labour because of the risks of harm to children’s physical and psychological health. There are direct health risks to child working on the mines and all children living in communities near mines face a range of environmental health hazards including 
defaultthe risk of water and soil contamination by toxic mercury or other chemicals
default. There is a strong association between children working in mines and the risk of alcohol abuse, substance misuse and sexual exploitation. World Vision has found that sex industri
defaultes can develop around mining sites which involve children, and research by Human Rights Watch found examples of girls who were trafficked from Nigeria to Mali to work in the sex industry around the gold mines.  
defaultExtractive industries are heavily concentrat
defaulted in fragile contexts in countries which face severe development challenges including weak institutional capacity, poor governance, political instability and the effects of conflict. These states also have weak child protection systems and limited social 
defaultprotection mechanisms which can help to prevent child abuse. The reality of corruption and under-investment means that some resource-rich fragile countries lack the capacity, and or, the political will that is necessary to properly hold corporate entities 
defaultoperating within their territories to account for the impact of their business activities.   This further demonstrates the need for UK corporations and the UK governmental to meets its international responsibilities to uphold human rights as set out in var
defaultious international human rights instruments including the Human Rights Act 1998, UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (UNCRC) and the Committee to the UNCRC’s general comment on business and human rights as well as the OECD 
defaultguide
default lines to multinational
defaults and the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights. 
defaultWorld Vision has worked with children and communities that are involved with artisanal mining across Southern Africa and in Asia for decades. We have found that children’s involvement in mining
default can take two forms; firstly some children work individually or with their families in small scale unregulated artisanal mining sites where they use basic techniques to dig for and extract precious metals. These metals are then sold through a series of mid
defaultdle men and some of these metals will end up with the big gold or diamond trading houses where they are either sold domestically or exported.  Some children combine mining with attending school, or use the income from mining towards school costs, but many 
defaultothers work for up to 15 hours a day, and do not earn enough for an evening meal at the end of the working day. Secondly, children also work illegally on larger and more regulated mining sites which are owned by big mining companies. In these cases child l
defaultabour is ignored or children work on the mines without being registered or using false identification. 
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWorld Vision recommendations on corporate governance and corporate responsibility defaultOne example the UK may choose to follow is the growing US political a
defaultwareness and willingness to use legislation to confront and combat child labour and trafficking. 
defaultThe Business Transparency on Trafficking and Slavery Act (H.R. 2759)
default is a US-wide bill introduced on 1 August 2011. It is modelled after  a California act and
default requires all publicly-traded or private company currently required to submit annual reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to ‘disclose efforts to identify and address the risks of human trafficking, forced labour, slavery, and the worst 
defaultforms of child labour in their supply chains.’ The bill would apply to all companies with an annual worldwide gross receipt exceeding one hundred million dollars
defaultLegislation in the UK could place, for example, the following requirements on British corporat
defaultions or those listed on the London Stock Exchange (FTSE): 
defaultWorld Vision welcomes the commitment from Home Secretary Theresa May to introduce a Modern Slavery Bi
defaultll in the next parliamentary session and also the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills review of Corporate Responsibility. We consider both of these new initiatives are important vehicles to introduce a stronger legislative approach to respond to
default the worst forms of child labour in the extractive. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSector-specific responses to the child labour in extractive industriesdefaultWorld Vision welcomes the UK government’s leadership in the establishment of the Extractive Industry Trading Initiative (EITI). We 
defaultconsider the initiative has the potential to provide much needed improvement in transparency about the amount of money extractive industry companies pay to governments, therefore promoting political accountability in these countries. The EITI does not addr
defaultess human rights issues directly, and a sector-wide framework is needed to improve transparency about corporations’ human rights and environmental impact which includes attention to children’s rights.  
defaultIn 2005 the ILO launched the ‘Minors out of Mining’ p
defaultrogramme, a tripartite programme between the International Council on Mining and Metals, trade unions and the ILO. The programme recognised that mining is one of the worst forms of child labour and it sought to 
defaulteliminate child mining by 2015. The programme
default however has not progressed beyond its initial announcements or achieved any tangible benefits for child minors. ILO/IPEC has insisted that they could not get the cooperation and leadership needed from the unions and the industry in order to make the progr
defaultamme work. The global community will not eliminate the worst forms of child labour by 2020 without effective large-scale programmes which address the needs of children working in the extractive industries. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Vorhees (D)
default(2011), Extractive Sector Companies Listed on Global Stock Exchanges, Revenue Watch Institute: 
default 
defaultLondon Mining Network (2012), UK Mining Companies &amp; the Case for Stricter Oversight: London 
default 
defaultILO (2005), A Load too Heavy to Carry: children in mining and quarrying, ILO: London 
default 
defaultInternational Initiative to End Child Labour, (June 2003) 
defaultKids are dying in Congolese Gold Mines and No one is held accountable, 
defaultAccessed (20/09/2013): 
defaulthttp://endchildl
defaultabor.org/?p=9976
default World Vision (2013) Child Miners Speak Key findings from Children and Artisanal Mining in the Kambove Region of the DRC. 
default ILO () A Load too Heavy; children in mining and 
defaultquarrying
default, 
default