&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Mr Philip Rule (LAI 0008)default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDear 
defaultMr Grayling
default,
default&#xa0;
defaultRe: Consultation paperdefault CP14/2013default: defaultTransforming legal aid: delivering a more credible and efficient systemdefault&#xa0;
defaultI 
defaultwish to respond
default to the consultation paper in light of the grave fears I have that 
defaultcertain proposals will lead to a system that
default is unworkable and
default leaves the vulnerable unable to obtain or enforce adequate legal protection
defaults
default of basic and fundamental rights
default including the right to liberty
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultI am driven to draft my own reply and not simply to
default endorse those of others or professional bodies given my firm belief the present proposals will remove two fundamental principles of the rule of law from a system seeking to do fairness. 
defaultThese are:
default(1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe principle that justice (
defaultbeing the fair and correct 
defaultoutcome – not just the process in some
default more
default general way
default) should be available to all and not depend on the financial resources of the individual
default. In many areas under the proposed system the ability to pay will be the only means by which to ensure a proper s
defaulttandard of quality of legal representation
default;
default(2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe principle that lawyers should not have an incentive in the outcome of a case 
defaultdirectly 
defaultcontrary to the interests of the lay client
default. 
defaultThe express aim of the proposals is to encourage lawyers to make final decisi
defaultons at earlier stages when less evidence is available to consider properly potential defences or alternative offences which should dispose of the case. More worrying though is the express 
defaultdesire to have 
defaultaccused
default people plead guilty
default by ensuring lawyers are p
defaultenalised should a client wish to proceed to a trial and should the client persist in his innocence contrary to the lawyer’s interests
default. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultProposals which will do away with these two 
defaultfundamental 
defaultprinciples 
defaultof justice for all, and lawyers acting in the best 
defaultinterests of their client (as wil
defaultl inevitably be eroded by the proposed
default large-firm, ‘no change of lawyers’
default, competitive fee-focused
default system) 
defaultwill create a two-tier justice system which will 
defaultin time 
defaultbecome as derided
default and mistrusted 
defaultby a large portion of the public 
defaultas that of our American colleagues
default 
default(
defaultas I have witnessed first-hand
default)
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultI confirm I have “the overall fiscal context firmly in mind” in my response [p5]. I also have in mind the need for fair remuneration to be provided to la
defaultwyers representing the disadvantaged and vulnerable who cannot afford to pay for access to justice themselves, and who require access to the courts as a protection from mistreatment by 
defaultthose placed in positions of power over them and charged with important
default responsibilities to perform fairly and 
defaultdutifully
default.
default 
defaultThe role of the courts in supervising those responsibilities is 
defaultvital and a noble tradition of our country. It underpins freedom and justice for all.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultI have serious concerns over many aspects of the cons
defaultultation paper, and have seen and concur with the concerns set out by my professional bodies on behalf of the public interest. My own reply will only focus on some of the issues where I feel I can add relevant considerations, but that is not to be taken as
default any indication I am only concerned by these specific issues.
default&#xa0;
defaultCriminal lawdefaultQ17. Do you agree with the proposal under the competition model that clients would generally have no choice in the representative allocated to them at the outset?
default&#xa0;
defaultQ20. Do you 
defaultagree with the proposal under the competition model that clients would be required to stay with their allocated provider for the duration of the case, subject to exceptional circumstances?
default&#xa0;
defaultQ8. Do you agree that, given the need to deliver further savings, 
defaulta 17.5% reduction in the rates payable for those classes of work not determined by the price competition is reasonable?
default&#xa0;
defaultQ26. Do you agree with the proposals to amend the Advocates’ Graduated Fee Scheme to: 
default-
defaultintroduce a single harmonised basic fee, payabl
defaulte in all cases (other than those that attract a fixed fee), based on the current basic fee for a cracked trial; 
default-
defaultreduce the initial daily attendance fee for trials by between approximately 20 and 30%;
default-
default and taper rates so that a decreased fee would be payable for every additional day of trial?
default&#xa0;
defaultI do not agree with the above proposals
default, although I accept the premise that some 
defaultsavings to expenditure
default may be 
defaultdeemed 
defaultinevitable
default and unavoidable
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOne of the most concerning aspects of the proposal in criminal legal aid is to ensure that 
defaultthere is no justification for continuing a tradition of seeking to offer a quality of service to the client. 
defaultThe fee under the present systems provides the same fee 
defaultto the lawyer who has done a very good job, avoiding any feeling of injustice, and inefficient use of court time or improperly long examinations of witnesses, and avoiding appeal grounds for failures to investigate issues or inadequate advocacy, as it does
default to the inadequate one. 
defaultThe only incentives remaining for the lawyer to do the 
defaultjob well are the prospect that clients will choose a lawyer with a good reputation or return to one with a proven record of providing a good level of service. 
defaultTo remove that lea
defaultves only the conscience of the lawyer. It is unclear whether the proposed bidders for contracts on “wholesale” justice will regard conscience as a matter that can be entered into the financial accounts at year-end. 
defaultT
defaulthere is no justification at all for remo
defaultving choice at the outset of the proceedings
default; and 
defaultgrave 
defaultdanger to restricting the ability of a criminally-accused who has come to realise his solicitor’s firm (technically I suppose, his provider) is 
defaultnot simply not doing the job that needs to be done
default. 
defaultRemo
defaultval of client choice is a removal of the last factor that encourages from a business-perspective the 
defaulteffort being placed into the service provided to seek to ensure a just result for the client.
default&#xa0;
defaultI have not previously felt it necessary to respond to consul
defaulttations concerning cuts to fees, which while painful for many individual practitioners we
defaultre not previously in a single
default move
default of such potential as to destroy the system of justice
default in which I work
default. Nonetheless undoubtedly in twelve years of practice I have al
defaultready seen a decline in standards following the changes to the structures of payment and to the levels of fees for publicly-funded work and in particular in crime. I have seen inadequate service to criminally-accused as well as to victims of crime. This ha
defaults frequently been seen in the case of representatives who have not been tested or proven in a quality-competitive field, but whose instructions were secured on the basis of financial incentive to the instructing solicitor or lawyer because it has been poss
defaultible for larger firms, in particular, to employ advocates who do not therefore obtain their cases through consistent high standards of performance and diligence but through being of the greatest financial value to the employer. Such a system does not save 
defaultthe taxpayer money in the long term given the appeals that result, and often not even in the immediate short-term cost either
default when substandard service attracts the same 
defaultfee 
defaultas a good quality of service
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI note however that the paper states “We recognise 
defaultthat given the reductions in the scope of civil legal aid through the recent implementation of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO), together with the 10% fee reduction in all civil and family legal aid fees which were mad
defaulte in 2010 and 2011, there is limited room for making further substantial cost 
defaultreductions in this area”
default (6.2)
default. It is not clear why the consistent reductions made over the past few years to the payments under the
default criminal
default AGFS do not present the same issue i
defaultn criminal legal aid and indicate as much as could be removed from the system without removing a credible standard of 
defaultadvocacy 
defaultservice has been.
default Substantial savings have been made over a relatively short space of time in the removal of 
defaultex post facto
default (
default‘
defaultred 
defaultcorner
default’
default) payments,
default the introduction of the Very High Cost Cases system, 
defaultand 
defaultthe incremental reductions to the AGFS and VHCC systems. 
defaultCases that 
defaulthad been
default capable of subsidising less-well remunerated work are a thing of the past
default already
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultI also note the int
defaultention to create 
defaultsavings of £220 million per year 
default[2.16]
default. 
defaultF
defaultrom the figures in the paper
default (e.g. table p19)
default this appears to be a little over
default 10% of total spend on legal aid.
default This suggests a disproportionate cut to criminal legal aid as the average case seems to be taking a cut of around 30%, sometimes much more.
default 
defaultThat follows the many years of reductions in fees which have made some junior advocates abandon publicly-funded wor
defaultk or move to employed positions where work is guaranteed and selection is not made on quality. 
defaultIt is also clear that the experience of 
default‘
defaultin-house
default’ advocacy
default systems, such as the Crown Prosecution Service trialed
default and some larger defence firms tried
default, is that t
defaulthey result in inefficiency and expense compared to the independent Bar, particularly when cases cannot be “cherry-picked” and consideration is given to sickness benefit, holiday pay, maternity and paternity pay, and pension requirements, as well as ineffic
defaultient running of trials 
defaultor lack of willingness to work hours beyond those for which payment is specifically being made.
default&#xa0;
defaultOne 
defaultintention is to have 
defaultless time spent on each case by practitioners
default, so producing less time required to be compensated by the fee pay
defaultable. 
defaultHowever insufficient consideration is given to 
defaultthe effects of other budgetary issues or institutional inefficiencies that contribute to ‘wastage’.
default The penalising of advocates for ineffective hearings should not follow from matters outside the control
default of the reasonably-competent advocate. For example the advocate is penalised in the case of a “
defaultnon-report
default” for sentencing by a probation officer; where an individual is
default not produced
default by the prison or custodian services; where a
default custody van 
defaultarrives too late 
defaultor a
default court 
defaultis simply 
defaulttoo busy so 
defaultthat cases are 
defaultadjourn
defaulted for lack of time.
default 
defaultThese issues should be the focus of the drive for efficiency. Experience in practice shows rarely is a lawyer’s interest in lack of speed or efficiency, quite the reverse.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe pap
defaulter expresses the intention to create an “incentive to try and complete cases as early as possible. We propose to restructure the Crown Court advocacy fee scheme, by paying the same rate whether there is an early or a late guilty plea or a short trial, and 
defaultby reducing and tapering the daily trial attendance rates in longer trials” (2.9). 
defaultMy first objection to this is clear by reference to one of the fundamental principles I identified above. 
defaultThis is a financial
default incentive for the advocate, who may have an emp
defaultloyer to answer to in the modern era
default as well as his conscience and professional code
default, to 
defaultsecure an outcome of the case favoured by the p
defaultroposers of the scheme
default.
default 
defaultThat intent seeks to rely on the potential for a lawyer’s self-interest above or in place of the
default lay client’s
default 
defaultinterest, if that intent is to have any meaning. 
defaultThis is simply wrong and not a proper 
defaultor ethical 
defaultway for a lawyer, or his funding client, to act. 
defaultFinancial incentives for lawyers have no place in a system of criminal justice.
default The aim 
defaultof the system 
defaultshould be only to 
defaultprotect the innocent from wrongful conviction whilst 
defaultsecuring justice for victims of crime. 
defaultSecondly, 
defaultthe proposal is wrong because it works against the lawyer who conscientiously wishes to see the 
defaultactual 
defaultevidence and actual
defaultly read it, before he gives conclusive advice to his client as to whether the appropriate 
defaultoffence has been charged, consideration of lawful defences, and 
defaultingredients of the offence. It is a system that rewards the lazy, the self-interested and the unconsci
defaultentious. To create a system with that aim only serves to demonstrate it is cost, not the just outcome of a case that it is now to be expected to be in the lawyer’s mind, and at the forefront no less.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe length of a trial is also not a matter that it shou
defaultld be overestimated is within the control of the advocate for one party.
default The attendance of witnesses, Judge’s availability during the trial and use by 
defaultthe list office for other work intermittently and intermingled, 
defaultthe attendance of defendants, the need fo
defaultr other counsel in the case to be released to attend the Court of Appeal, 
defaultthe speed of examination by other counsel, 
defaultthe speed or manner of answers by witnesses, 
defaultthe agreement or otherwise to matters of Admission avoiding the need for evidence, etc, are al
defaultl examples of matters affecting the length of trial not within such control, and sometimes not capable of anticipation when a brief is accepted.
default&#xa0;
defaultI would note that I am in favour of the proposal that given there is (likely) to be an earnings cap on legal 
defaultaid availability there should be provision made for defence costs orders from central funds
default (3.36-3.37)
default.
default 
defaultI am however not in favour in general terms of the earnings cap, or of the level proposed, given the 
defaultexpense of a long or complicated matter may seem u
defaultnattainable to some of those removed from eligibility, and so encourage disposals of cases based on financial and not legal consideration, or in worst cases based not on guilt but on 
defaultthe need to limit expenditure and exposure to the costs of trial. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI am also not in favour of capping recovery at legal aid rates. 
defaultIt appears the scheme proposed seeks to prevent the establishment of a private-client market driven by private market forces, as in that instance there would be a ready comparable rate of pay 
defaultfor criminal lawyers to compare with legal aid rates. It is difficult to see what other justification there can be for refusing to allow an innocent person who is acquitted of the crime alleged against him to recover 
default“reasonable”
default rates of expenditure on hi
defaults fully-justified defence
default (as used to be the case)
default.
default The likelihood is that some defendants will be compelled to employ no lawyers or only the very most junior to conduct even complicated cases where they cannot afford to spend money on experienced advocate
defaults when there is no prospect of recovering fees that may be reasonable but nonetheless would be in excess of legal aid rates.
default&#xa0;
defaultIf cuts are imposed on advocates it would be right that the issue of time of payment be considered, as well as travelling expenses
default. For many junior barristers (and a growing number of more senior ones also) the costs of travel may outweigh the full gross fee for a case. The local Bar rule is no longer fit for use, and should be replaced by payment of the reasonable travel costs of al
defaultl advocates attending court so that at least the individual is not actually out-of-pocket for having agreed to go to work (or meet professional obligations to attend in relation to a case transferred to follow a judge to another court).
default In addition the unc
defaultertainty over timing of payment for a case
default, as to when it may conclude, or the fee be processed by the LAA is a major problem when fees are so low in any event. 
defaultThere ought to be urgent consideration given to reforming the system for payment to ensure a re
defaultgular and prompt payment for work done. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPrison lawdefaultQ1. Do you agree with the proposal that criminal legal aid for prison law matters should be restricted to the proposed criteria?
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultunderpinning philosophy of the approach to prison law appears to be that this is a ‘growth’ area and that it ought not to be. 
defaultIt is of course conceivable that with developments of the law in fact prison law amounting for 1% of criminal legal aid spending i
defaults well-within the limits that should be expected if justice is to be done to individuals placed in custody. Such population has mental health or other vulnerabilities in disproportion to the general public, as is well-known. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever it also appears that 
defaultno allowance is made in the prediction of growth for the 
defaultimpact of the 
defaultabolition of the 
defaultIPP (indeterminate sentence for public protection) on 3
defaultrd
default December 2012. 
defaultAs a practitioner in this field I am aware of the volume of casework that has resulted from the
default failures of public law duty by the Ministry of Justice in relation to provision for the IPP population. As this population de
defaultclines it seems very probable indeed that there will be a natural reduction in spending 
defaulton legal aid in prisons (less parole heari
defaultngs, less urgent need for rehabilitation courses, 
defaultetc).
default I ask that there be review of the statisti
defaultcs said to underpin the need to make such drastic proposed cuts to legal aid availability in prison law to take account of the abolition of the IPP.
default Without s
defaultuch statistical consideration the perceived need behind the propo
defaultsals in this area may be being very considerably overstated.
default It already appears that the most recent year’s figures saw a percentage decrease (3.12 table).
default&#xa0;
defaultFurther, to
default answer the specific qu
defaultestion
default (Q1)
default, I do not believe the proposed criteria for funding legal aid are proper, or potentially lawful indeed. They are simply too restrictive. “Matters related to categorisation, segregation, close supervision centre and dangerous and severe 
defaultpersonality disorder referrals and assessments, resettlement issues and planning and licence conditions would not be funded as they do not engage any of the proposed scope criteria”
default (3.18
default; and Annex B
default)
default. However it is wholly unrealistic to suggest internal 
defaultcomplaints or Ombudsman systems can adequately address such issues, and wholly disingenuous or to misunderstand the progression of prisoners or the conditions of existence involved in the same to regard such matters as of insufficient importance to require
default the protections of the rule of law
default and access to judicial supervision
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThe removal of funding from such wide range of cases, including some disciplinary adjudications where the law may or may not be complicated as to the mental or 
defaultactus reus
default ingredient
defaults of the offence irrespective of the sentence that follows, 
defaultwill inevitably mean that access to a court, through judicial review, will be denied as solicitors or the unqualified representatives sometimes doing this low-paid work will not have considered th
defaulte case for the potential need to commence a judicial review that a lawyer could identify within the circumstances of the individual’s case. Without the involvement of solicitors there will be almost no potential for the need for judicial review of the deci
defaultsion of a State official to be identified and for judicial review to follow. 
defaultThis is despite the fact some of those areas proposed to be removed from the legal aid scheme involve determination of civil rights in Article 6 ECHR terms or Article 8 ECHR inter
defaultferences that must be limited to only those necessary and proportionate.
default The State will not thereby provide an effective remedy
default (as Art. 13 requires be provided)
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultJudicial reviewsdefaultQ5. Do you agree with the proposal that providers should only be paid for w
defaultork carried out on an application for judicial review, including a request for reconsideration of the application at a hearing, the renewal hearing, or an onward permission appeal to the Court of Appeal, if permission is granted by the Court (but that reas
defaultonable disbursements should be payable in any event)?
default&#xa0;
defaultThe consultation papers states “We continue to believe it is important to make legal aid available for most judicial review cases, to ensure access to a mechanism which enables persons to challenge dec
defaultisions made by public authorities which affect them” (3.61). In fact the proposed system will ensure “most” cases are not able to be brought. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is expressed to be an aim that “lawyers who bring weak cases will no longer be reimbursed” [p3]. 
defaultI take no
default issue with the aim that only deserving cases should be funded. The present system in fact provides for this aim by requiring the specialis
defaultt unit at the Legal Aid Agenc
defaulty (as it now is) to 
defaultapprove funding applications by an analysis of the merits of the cas
defaulte. However even if some reform could be made to improve the system, the proposals in the paper are inappropriate and would prevent lawyers from providing the service to deserving cases for the reasons that follow.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe first assumption made is that lawyers
default are bringing cases that are “weak” (thus the need for “a greater incentive for providers to give more careful consideration to the strength of the case before applying for permission for judicial review, through transferring the financial risk of the appl
defaultication to the provider”; 3.62). 
defaultThis assumption must assume that the lawyers when commencing a judicial 
defaultreview claim are in a position to know the case is “weak” (
defaulti.e. 
defaultmay not be regarded as arguable by the Court, though it is well-known the Court does no
defaultt apply a test as to “arguability” that is as generous as that might sound to the uninitiated to the actual practice of the judiciary in determining what cases warrant a full hearing). 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhilst usually a Letter Before Action (“LBA”) has been issued prior 
defaultto a claim, frequently, with tight deadlines to be met of promptitude and a 3-month final deadline, the position for the lawyer can be:
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultno reply at all 
defaultis 
defaultreceived to the LBA;
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultthere will in all cases (in practice) be no evidence provided by the proposed De
defaultfendant upon which merits can be reassessed at that early stage;
default3)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultchanges of circumstances beyond the lawyer's control after the commencement of proceedings frequently affect the merits, and judicial review is for practical not academic relief. Delay by the
default 
defaultC
defaultou
defaultrt in dealing with permission may mean
default time 
defaulthas 
defaultmoved on and matters become academic; 
defaultit will not be known whether the
default court 
defaultmay 
defaultgr
defaultant urgent consideration or not;
default 
defaultunknown whether D
defaultefendants seek extra time 
defaultto provide defence and evidence;
default 
defaultor a Defenda
defaultnt may take another decision rendering the claim academic
default, either as a result of the claim being issued, or as a result of delay in the court consideration so that another decision is taken following policy timetables for reviews or fresh decisions
default;
default 
defaulta clai
defaultm may be stayed behind other like cases which will address the point of contest and may mean that the claim becomes unarguable only after issuing and after a subsequent decision that precedes the grant of permission to the instant claim, etc;
default 
default4)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultthere may be
default no previous judgment establishing the legal principle at the heart of the claim thus no reliable guide to whether the case would be probable to succeed or not.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe proposal not to pay 
defaultlawyers for considerable drafting work, or oral permission hearings, takes no account of the need for “test” cases to be brought in relation to policies, decisions or procedures as to which there is no previous judgment. There is no justification for the l
defaultawyer to be 
defaultliable to penalisation for having begun a case where the
default law is in a state of evolution
default. 
defaultFrequently in such cases a Deputy Judge on pa
defaultper may refuse permission but an 
defaultoral hearing 
defaultfor renewal 
defaultmay succeed in demonstrating that the
default 
defaultpoint should
default i
defaultn due course be considered
default. That may be particularly so where the relevant decision is a Strasbourg one which may conflict with earlier domestic authority so necessitating
default appeal
default to
default the higher courts, if after a full hearing
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultI
defaultn truth 
defaultthe failure of a jud
defaulticial review
default claim 
defaultto obtain permission 
defaultmay have nothing 
defaultat all 
defaultto do with a lawyer making any error in the assessment of merits or prospects at the stage at which the decision must be made whether to accept instructions and issue proceedings.
default Therefore it
default cannot be right to penalise the lawyer for bringing a case. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn any event it would be possible to identify cases that were truly wholly without merit from the start even on the information then available to the lawyer (though it is likely the LAA would n
defaultot have granted funding in the first place
default, and the error would be a shared one
default). 
defaultIn the absence of a judicial declaration to that effect 
defaultthere 
defaultis
default no 
defaultjustification for not compensating the lawyer for the time expended on the claim. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe impact of such a r
defaultule will be ‘chilling’, and prevent proper judicial reviews being brought because the risk to the lawyer is too great given the unknowns and imponderables 
defaultdescribed 
defaultabove.
default The development of the law will be hindered; and individuals left without access to 
defaulta lawyer competent to advance their case even though they might have succeeded and been entitled to relief.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe second incorrect assumption underpinning the proposals is that there is a comparable position with that in the
default immigration and asylum appeals t
defaulto the
default Upper Tribunal
default (e.g. 3.70
default; a system which 
defaultitself recognised the need for some exceptions: n40 at para. 3.70
default)
default. The comparison is 
defaultmisconceived
default and erroneous
default.
default 
defaultIn such Tribunal cases there has been a hearing already. This is 
defaultvitally 
defaultimportant because:
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultT
defaulthe individual has already had access to an independent tribunal, and had a judicial decision made.
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultT
defaulthere 
defaultare specific limitations on the admission of
default 
default‘
defaultfresh
default’
default evidence 
defaultin immigration and asylum cases 
default(rule 
default15(2A) 
defaultof the 
defaultTribunal Procedure (
defaultUpper Tribunal
default) defaultR
defaultules
default 2008
default (as amended)).
default Such evidence would usually in any event come from the individual not the UKBA, and accordingly lawyers choosing to appeal will be expected to know the full content of the case.
default3)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe lawyers have already been recompensed for becomin
defaultg familiar with the facts, evidence, arguments and counter-arguments.
default4)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Upper Tribunal is likely in the vast majority of cases to be concerned with 
defaultfactual not legal issues
default, 
defaultthe reverse position to most
default judicial review
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFurthermore in such Upper Tribunal cases to-date there has been a recompense in the form that “no-win no-fee” has operated in the private sector. 
defaultIt is of course proposed to remove that uplift, but there is plainly no evidence as to how the scheme will wor
defaultk even in the Upper Tribunal without the uplift of 35% that was payable on 
defaultall
default the fees of the appeal if permission was granted.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe rationale for the system of payment depending on permission, and the rationale for now removing the uplift is specifically stated to be “based on their detailed knowledge of the case and the specialist understanding of the law in the relevant area... T
defaulthe provider is in the best position to know the strength of their client’s case and the likelihood of it being granted permission. For this reason also, we do not consider that an uplift is required to compensate for working “at risk” on the permission app
defaultlication” (6.29). Conversely in judicial review when the 
defaultapplication 
defaultdecision 
defaultis
default taken it cannot be
default “based on their detailed knowledge of the case” 
defaultgiven the early stage of the proceedings and the fact the Defendant’s evidence 
defaultand summary resistance 
defaultwill n
defaultot have been supplied.
default&#xa0;
defaultAssuming the recording was 
defaulthistorically 
defaultdone with some understanding of the important use to which it is now to be put, the statistics record 330 cases ended without permission but with substantial benefit, but 
default500 did not. It is no
defaultt acceptable that the 330 cases should not be brought (as is suggested: 3.
default67, 3.73).
default In any event the reliability of the statistical analysis to support the contention that 500 cases produced no benefit to the client is open to very substantial 
defaultquestion. 
defaultThere is also a question to be answered as to the value of access to justice, and a judicial determination, where otherwise the individual would feel no
default independent
default arbitration had occurred to consider his grievances against the approach or decision of the
default challenged decision-maker.
default&#xa0;
defaultFurthermore it is not just the 330 cases that would not be brought, it is those that actually succeeded but which carried a risk too great for a lawyer to be able to undertake the case. 
defaultThe proportions of permission 
defaultrefusal
default in 
defaultcases
default, 845 of 
default1799, would obviously mean that lawyers could not afford to approach their cases on the basis of being paid for 
defaultslightly more than half. That is before one takes account of the reduction in fees by one-half for those other cases (as is propos
defaulted also)
default, and takes into account that some paper refusals may not be able to be challenged given the greater risk of yet more time spent on a case that may not be recompensed so not proceeding further al
defaultthough that claim might ultimate
defaultly have been successf
defaultul
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn effect making the funding structure for meritorious cases, meeting the funding test, dependant on 
defaultno-win no-fee (a win being the grant of permission) is not a sustainable or fair basis for provision of public law advice, drafting and representation
default.
default Judicial review 
defaultin public law matters is depende
defaultnt 
defaultup
defaulton many factors for the grant of permission that cannot be known at the start, 
defaultand have nothing to do with whether the lawyer’s advice was good or not
default or whether the institution of the case was the 
defaultpro
defaultper course to take
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultA
defaultccess to a court for a decision
default to be reviewed
default is fundamental to 
defaulta 
defaultfair system
default of governance and 
defaultto the relationship between the State and the individual affected by the actions and decisions of public bodies
default. Where cases are evenly-balanced on the arguments, 
defaulta
default lawyer 
defaultwould not
default 
defaultaccept
default a 
default“
defaultno-win, no-fee
default” case even where uplifts exist.
default The risks would be economically unsustainable.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe potential for cases to be considered by the Court of Appeal to grant permis
defaultsion to proceed with judicial review would likely become a theoretical one. 
defaultThe risks to the provider of taking a case to a second level at the risk no reimbursement would be made for any of the work would be far less tolerable than in the case of a Tribun
defaultal case where the work below was already recompensed. 
default&#xa0;
defaultLastly on this issue, it is 
defaultunreasonable 
defaultand unrealistic 
defaultto suppose 
defaultthe 
defaultcourts will entertain arguments as to costs only once 
defaultthe 
defaultpublic law issue is 
defaultrendered 
defaultacademic
default (3.75
default-3.76
default). It is also
default counter-
defaultproductive to 
defaultthe 
defaultcosts to be incurred by the 
defaultpublic 
defaultauthorities as defendants, so 
defaultit is 
defaultnot sensible to require this.
default Also 
defaultas costs are discretionary 
defaultit is whol
defaultly unreasonable to ask providers to incur 
defaultthe 
defaultrisk of still greater costs to go to a contested 
defaulthearing on that issue
default alone with no clear entitlement to costs given the breadth of judicial discretion. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMy answer to Q5 is that I do not agree for the above reasons it is appropriate or workable to remove payment for work done for the permission applica
defaulttion when it has been refused (for any of the reasons it might be).
default&#xa0;
defaultQ6. Do you agree with the proposal that legal aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success?
default&#xa0;
defaultThis proposal would represent a further ‘chilling’ effect for the testing of legal disputes where the issue may be of fundamental importance and relate to a new or undetermined decision or policy, but where the resolution of the claim would be a developmen
defaultt of the law and so cannot be reliably guided by previous cases to establish a likelihood of success. 
defaultThere is insufficient basis for a need to remove funding from borderline cases irrespective of the public importance of the issues at stake
default, or the indivi
defaultdual’s own interest in the claim
default (which may be very substantial even if not
default a case of the limited types 
defaultexcepted from the prospects of success criteria)
default.
default I do not agree with the proposal.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ31. Do you agree with the proposal that fees for self-employed bar
defaultristers appearing in civil (non-family) proceedings in the County Court and High Court should be harmonised with those for other advocates appearing in those courts.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis 
defaultproposal does not recognise the use of counsel in specialist work where counsel is c
defaultheaper because of the specialist background knowledge allowing less time to be spent on the case, and does not make any reasonable comparison of like situations. 
defaultFor example in judicial review work 
defaultin the main, and almost universally if not universally in 
defaultcomplicated or specialist areas of judicial review work the 
defaultadvocacy and key drafting is done by Counsel. 
defaultHigh Court work 
defaultrequires higher rights of audience that the majority of solicitors in civil work do not 
defaulteven 
defaultpossess. 
defaultThe payment structure is not an 
defaultanomaly, but a representation of the relationship to private rates to the legal aid rates, where if the disparity is too great
default the best barristers will simply not be prepared to undertake publicly-funded work.
default That will create a two-tier quality system ana
defaultthema to a true justice system. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe reduction proposed 
defaultwould also 
defaultreinforce the problems facing judicial review work 
defaultwhere barristers would not be 
defaultable to rely even on current rates of recompense to subsidise cases where permission was not granted. 
defaultThe potential for “enhancement” of fees 
defaultis particularly inappropriate to judicial review work. It is unlikely to be possible to establish a claim is “exceptional” 
default(Annex I) 
defaultor 
defaultwas conducted in an “exceptional” manner, where the court will 
defaultsimply 
defaultnormally e
defaultxpect to see barristers appearing and conducting such cases with that same speed, efficiency
default, skill and expertise, and will expect most judicial review cases to be of complexity
default, albeit the complexity and skill in a judicial review claim may 
defaultordinarily be 
defaultthought of as being exceptional in the large majority of such cases
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn judicial review work at least there is no justification for reducing the fees paid to barristers, as there is no ‘anomaly’ because the type of work that requires judicial review is 
defaultsimply not appropriate to be conducted by a solicitor, as present practice already evidences.
default It will further be unduly difficult to establish one skilfully-presented judicial review is exceptional compared to other skilfully-presented judicial reviews.
default&#xa0;
defaultI sincerely hope that the Ministry of Justice will revisit the proposals in light of the responses to the consultation, including this one, and alter the proposals before significant damage is done to the legal profession and to the 
defaultpublic confidence and f
defaultaith in the justice system and fairness of British society.
default&#xa0;
default23 September 2013
default1
default&#xa0;
default