&#xa0;
defaultAssistant Chief Constable Janette McCormickdefault -default Written evidencedefaultThis response from Assistant Chief Constable Janette McCormick, Cheshire Constabulary, National Policing Lead for Gypsy / Roma / Traveller issues, part of the Equality, Diversity &amp; Human Rights defaultNational Policing Business Area. defaultI 
defaultwish to comment on Clause 21 of the Draft Deregulation Bill regarding the removal of the power of Ministers to require local authorities to pr
defaultepare housing strategies under S
defaultection 87 of the Local Government Act 2003 (including the accommodation needs of Gypsies and Travellers). 
defaultWhilst this proposal is consistent with the Government’s desire to promote the localism agenda
default, I am concerned that 
defaultit fails to recognise the particular and urgent need for the provision of additional Gypsy and Traveller sites and the
default 
defaultslow progress of local authorities towards meeting that need.
defaultClause 21 proposes as follows:
default(1) Section 87 of the Local Government Act 2003 (which confers powers on the Secretary of State, in relation to England and the Welsh Ministers, in relation to Wales, to require local housing authorities to have housing strategies and to prepare housing statements) ceases to have effect in relation to England.
defaultUnder 
defaultSection 225 of the Housing Act 2004default, local authorities are required to develop and implement strategies to respond to the 
defaultspecific 
defaultaccommodation needs of the Gypsy and Traveller communities living in their areas.
default 
defaultSection 8 of the Housing Act 1985default defaultrequires local authorities to consider the various accommodation needs of 
defaultalldefault 
defaultlocal population
defaults
default and to carry out periodic reviews in order to provide relevant and appropriate provision to meet these needs. 
defaultSection 8 (1) actually says:-
default&#xa0;
defaultEvery local housing authority shall consider housing conditions in their district and the needs of the district with respect to the provision of further housing accommodation.
default&#xa0;
defaultGiven that the duty to 
defaultconsider the "needs of the district" will still apply 
defaultin the future, it would only be sensible to continue the requirement to produce housing strategies and statements for reasons of public accountability at the very least. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe key issue in respect of unauthorised Gypsy &amp; Traveller encampments is the lack of accommodation for the Travelling community. The shortage of suitable sites for Gypsy and Traveller families to live on and access as they move around the country leads to groups setting up unauthorised encampments (and increasingly unauthorised developments), thus creating the biggest single source of conflict between the Travelling and settled communities. 
defaultLocal Authorities were previously under a formal legal duty to provide sites for Gypsies and Travellers. This was established by the Caravan Sites Act 1968 which was a private members bill. The duty upon local authorities to provide sites was repealed by the then Government as a result of measures contained within the Criminal Justice &amp; Public Order Act 1994. By that time less than half of all local 
defaultauthorities had in fact complied with the previous duty. Virtually no action was taken against any authority in respect of that failing. 
defaultOver the subsequent years since 1994 - coupled with continued migration and household formation - this has meant that the numbers of Gypsies and Travellers requiring authorised places to live or stop on far outweigh the number of authorised pitches available. In addition to the lack of available authorised pitches, Gypsies and Travellers have also historically found gaining planning permission a major obstacle to providing a site for themselves and their families. Those Gypsies and Travellers who can afford to buy land are frequently in breach of planning laws when they attempt to develop that land for residential use. Subsequently, they find themselves subject to enforcement action and often evicted, frequently resorting to the use of further unauthorised land or accommodation.
defaultSince Section 225 of the Housing Act 2004 was enacted along with other measures, 
defaultthere has been
default at least 
defaultsome positive progress in site provision
default, but the effect of Clause 21 of the Deregulation Bill would threaten such progress. 
defaultAccording to the current most reliable figures, 
defaultsome 20% of the Gypsy and Traveller population in England who live in caravans reside on unauthorised encampments and unauthorised developments.  The simple reason why this occurs is that there is 
defaultstill 
defaultinadequate provision of sites.  
defaultIt has been widely reported that 
defaultthe UN Special Rapporteur on Housing, following her recent visit to the UK, stated:
defaultIn closing, let me also mention that during my visit I have also received multiple testimonies on the shortage of sufficient, adequate and safe sites for Gypsy and Traveller communities across the United Kingdom, many of whom feel this is part of the stigma and discrimination they regularly face from Gover
defaultnments and society as a whole. 
defaultDespite multiple efforts and policies put in place to address this situation, it is fair to say that leaving local authorities to make their own decision with no accountability and national process to reconcile the Gypsy and Traveller settled communities remains a source of concern.
defaultThe Government’s current planning policy, 
defaultPlanning policy for traveller sites
default, states that every local authority should already have in place a five year deliverable supply of sites.
default As I understand it, 
defaultvirtually no local authorities have such a 
defaultsupply 
defaultin place within their Local Plan.
defaultI suggest that this means that 
defaultnot only should there 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultbe proper local housing strategies 
defaultin place 
defaultbut 
defaultalso 
defaultthere should be 
defaulton-going 
defaultGovernment involvement to ensure that sites are provided, otherwise history has shown over 
defaultthe last five decades 
defaultthat local authorities will
default not 
defaultprovide the necessary sites.  
defaultIn summary defaultI foresee considerable issues defaultwith Clause 21 defaultthat would impact on policing and ask that these defaultbe taken into consideration when the bill is drafted. default&#xa0;defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default