&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Ben Hardwick [OLS0022]default&#xa0;
defaultI 
defaultam
default delighted to hear of your committee’s laudable efforts to look into the subject of 
defaultthe
default damage 
defaultthat 
defaultcan be done to the younger generation by uncontrolled internet access – thank you very much for 
defaultlaunching 
defaultthis
default enquiry
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultT
defaulthe ordered, peaceful and generally prosperous 
defaultoutward-looking UK society with its 
defaultopportunities, comprehensively organised education, 
defaulthealthcare, aid, inf
defaultrastructure and
default defence/security arrangements
default 
defaultare a priceless result of the daily work of Government – something that is rarely recognised or valued like it should be.
default&#xa0;
defaultThese benefits also extend far beyond Britain’s shores and the UK i
defaults still a beacon of tolerance and crucial lynchpin of global peace and security
default as well as 
defaultbeing 
defaultan example that is frequently followed by other Governments and States
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultLittle wonder then that Government is undoubtedly an instrument of God – 
default1
defaultst
default Epistle 
defaultof 
defaultPeter
default, Chapter
default 2, V13
default;
default it is a ‘giver’ and ‘provider’ as well as a ‘controller’
default – again
default,
default the Bible states 
defaultin the Epistle to the Romans Chapter 13 
default‘for 
defaulthe
default bears not the sword in vain’
default along with a good deal else
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultGovernment’s first duty 
defaultis
default the protection of its citizens
default – this is an area at which HMG excels whether in defence and intelligence matters or law-enforcement that stabilises and enhances the condition and experience of society and its citizens and the whole global community.
default&#xa0;
defaultI se
defaultek by these few paragraphs to set out simply how absolutely right it is for you to persist with better control measures 
defaulton internet viewing 
defaultand that you may be encouraged 
defaultand set forward 
defaultin doing what is clearly your duty.
default&#xa0;
defaultI am a farther of 4 children fro
defaultm 3 
defaultto 
default10 years old and revel in watching their rapid development and willingness to absorb knowledge at an apparently impossible rate. They are very impressionable and it is a very great responsibility as parents that my wife and I have in protecting and 
defaultnurturing the next generation
default into responsible citizens
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultAffectionate
default control and unselfishness is absolutely critical in this and it is really tragic to hear figures from OFCOM that more than 75% of 14-16 year olds have accessed adult material.
default 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis i
defaults a situation that will cause permanent mind-scarring and a lack of fidelity and stable relationships on which true happiness is built in 
defaultour 
defaultsociety
default – to say nothing of the cost to 
defaultGovernment and the taxpayer of broken homes because of so-called freedom t
defaulto look at this 
defaultcontent
default when in one’s tender teens.
default&#xa0;
defaultHMG should move forward fearlessly with comprehensive and efficient control measures of what is currently a lawless ‘wild west’ of media so as not to fail the potential of following generations.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is 
defaulta
default most revolting and immoral 
defaultthought
default that there are actually publishers and persons making millions out of degrading us and ruining the moral compass of the young in our society.
default&#xa0;
defaultI believe that there should be default blocking of all adult material on inte
defaultrnet enabled devices sold in the UK as soon as possible.
default&#xa0;
defaultI wish you all the best and courage in your deliberations on this vital subject.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default