Written evidence submitted by Professor Steve StranddefaultThis submission address
defaultes
default directly each of
default the 
defaultfive 
defaultkey questions 
defaultgiven 
defaultin the 
defaultCommittee's 
defaultrequest for written evidence
default.
default1. There is no doubt that White Working Class (WWC) 
defaultstudents
default are the lowest achieving group of young people in 
defaultEngland 
defaultterms of educational achievement at age 16. Figure 1 below plots 
defaultthe age 16 examination results for 2011 
defaultfor each combination of 
defaultethnic
default group
default and entitlement to a Fre
defaulte School Meal (FSM)
default. 
defaultFigure 1:default              defaultPercentage of pupils achieving 5 or more GCSE or equivalent A*-C grades including English and mathematics by ethnic group adefaultnd entitlement to FSM: England, 2011defaultSource: Strand (201
default4a
default).
default2. Only 28% of White British students on FSM achieve the threshold 
defaultof 5 or more GCSE
defaults
default A*-C including English and maths, 
defaultcompared to 62% of White British pupil not on FSM.
default No other ethnic-FSM co
defaultmbination has lower attainment than White British students on FSM.
default3. The above 'headlines' figures need to be considered in some depth to tease out exactly what the pattern of results are in relation to social class, ethnicity and gender. Strand (201
default4
defaulta
default) h
defaultas completed a detailed analysis using the Longitudinal Study of Young People in England 
default(LSYPE)
default. This 
defaulthas 
defaultthe 
defaultbenefit
default 
defaultthat 
defaultit
default draw
defaults
default on data o
defaultn
default parent
defaults
default'
default occupation
defaults
default, educational qu
defaulta
defaultlifications
default, 
defaultwhether the family own their own home
default,
default the deprivation of the neighbourhood in which the family live
default as well as whether the student is entitlement to a FSM
default. These factors are 
defaultcombine
defaultd
default 
defaultto create a robust continuous measure of the 
defaultfamily 
defaults
defaultocio-economic 
defaultstatus (SES
default)
default. 
defaultThey key result
defaults are presente
defaultd in Figure 2 below. 
defaultFigure 2: Age 16 points score by ethnic group, gender and SES based on LSYPE dataset.defaultBoys
defaultGirls
defaultNotes
default:  (
default1
default)
default. The outcome (total points score) is a measure of achievement based on all examinations completed by the young person 
defaultat age 16, and is expressed on a scale where 0 is the mean (average) score for all Young People at age 16 and two-third of YP score between -1 and 1.
default    (
default2
default)
default. 
defaultThe SE
defaultS
default 
defaultmeasure
default also has a mean (average) of zero 
defaulta
defaultnd 
defaultthe effects for low SES 
defaultare estimated 
defaultat 
default-1SD and of high SES at +1SD
default. 
defaultSource: 
defaultSee 
defaultStrand (201
default4a) for full details
default.
default4. 
defaultThe results confirm
default that
default:
default5. 
defaultLevels of achievement 
defaultfor boys are generally lower than for girls, 
defaultand 
defaultthis is just as true for
default 
defaultWWC pupils as any other
default group
default, with 
defaultW
defaultWC boys 
defaulthaving lower achievement (-.50 SD) 
defaultthan WWC girls
default (-.30 SD)
default, as shown in Figure 2. However 
defaultit is important to note that 
defaultWWC defaultgirls are defaultthe lowest achieving group among girlsdefault, so the 
defaultpattern of concern over the low achievement of WWC pupils applies a
defaults much to girls as it does to boys.
default6. Important evidence here is provided by considering pupils progress age 11 to age 16. F
defaultigure 3
default uses the LSYPE 
defaultdataset 
defaultto graph 
defaulteducational 
defaultachievement at age 11, 14 and 16. We do this for the lowest 20% of pupils in terms of family SES, for the middle group (between 40% and 60%) and for the top 20% in terms of family SES. 
default7. What is particu
defaultlarly notable here is the pronounced decline in educational achievement among White British students from the lowest SES quintile,  in contrast to most ethnic minority groups. 
defaultFigure 6: Mean normal score at age 11, age 14 and age 16 by ethnic group at bottom, middle and upper SES quintilesdefaultSES bottom quintiledefaultSES middle quintiledefaultSES top quintiledefaultNotes: Age 16 score is the normalised core points score (CPS) so 
defaultscores at 
defaultall three time points are based on
defaultly on
default English, mathematics and science 
defaulttests/exams
default.
default Mixed heritage and any other ethnic group are excluded for clarity.  
defaultSource: Strand (2013).
default8. What accounts for these changes in educational achievement?  It is inevitably difficult to establish causality from observational data, but Strand (2014a) was able to use the LSYPE to evaluate the impact of a wide range of student
default, family and neighbourhood variables not just on achievement at age 16 but on educational progress age 11-16. Many factors were significantly associated with progress, but the four main factors were: 
default–
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultPupil aspirations to continue in full-time education (F
defaultTE) post 16 
default–
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultParents aspirations for the young person to continue in FTE after 16 
default–
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAcademic Self Concept (ASC) (how good students felt they were at school work)
default–
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFrequency of completing homework (an indicator of effort or motivation)
default9. It should be noted t
defaulthat the majority of WC students have positive educational aspirations. For example in LSYPE at age 14 approximately  60% of WWC boys, 72% of Black Caribbean WC boys and 75% of WWC girls aspire to continue in FTE after age 16 (Strand, 2014a). However these 
defaultlevels are substantially lower than the averages of all other groups which were uniformly high across the SES spectrum at 90%-98%. The results are shown in Figure 3. Similar patterns were observed for ASC and homework. There is strong evidence that educati
defaultonal aspirations differ markedly by SES and ethnicity
default, and are associated with the decline in achievement of WWC students.
default 
defaultFigure 3: Aspirations at age 14 to continue in FTE after age 16default10. 
defaultThis does not mean 
defaultthat WWC 
defaultstudents 
defaultare unsupported at home
default. Strand &amp; Winston (2008) in a study of five 
defaultinner city 
defaultBirmingham
default schools show
default 
defaultWWC students report positive general 
defaultsupport for their 
defaulteducation among their parents
default 
default(
defaultsuch as help with homework, 
defaultproviding 
defaultrewards
default for doing we
defaultll at school
default, attending
default parents'
default evenings
default)
default. However at the same time 
defaultWWC students 
defaultwere mo
defaultre likely than other ethnic groups 
defaultto report low educational aspirations
default at home 
default(
defaulte.g. People from my family don’t go to college after they leave school; Family 
defaultmembers do not think that school is very important for success
default)
default.
default11. 
defaultOverall t
defaulthese 
defaultresults 
defaultindicate that, d
defaultespite high socio-economic deprivation
default,
default key resilience factors 
defaultfor WC pupils from most minority ethnic groups 
defaultare high educational aspirations (both 
defaultpupils &amp; parents), strong academic self concept and high motivation (homework)
default. Th
defaultis 
defaultma
defaulty reflect the '
defaulti
defaultmmigrant paradigm
default'
default (Kao &amp; T
defaulthompson
default, 2003)
default whereby immigrants devote themselves more to education than the native population because they lack financial c
defaultapital and see education as a way out of poverty
default.
default The inverse of this is true for W
defaulthite British and Black Caribbean WC 
defaultstudents: 
defaultl
defaultow
defaulter
default educational aspirations
default by parents and students
default, poor ASC and low motivation 
defaultindicates an increased risk of dis
defaultengaged or
default 
defaultdisaffect
defaulted
default learners
default. 
defaultIn the era 
defaultof full employment
default there may have been little 
defaultpenalty
default 
defaultto disengagement 
defaultwhere jobs were plentiful
default,
default often through family contacts
default,
default without the need for educational qualifications. However there is a high cost to an 
default‘oppositi
defaultonal culture’ 
default(Willis, 1977) 
defaultin 
defaultthe 
defaultnew knowledge economy.
default12. It is important not to over-emphasise 
defaultan
default individualistic notion 
defaultof 
defaultaspirations and to recognise structural influences from 
defaultneighbourhood
default, family and school. It is not enough for young people to aspire, they also need to be able to navigate the paths to their goals
default (Strand &amp; Winston, 2008)
default. There is an important role for s
defaultchools
default, particularly in disadvantaged areas,
default in supporting 
defaultstudents and 
defaultparents
default by providing clear information on 
defaulthow a minimum number of GCSEs are required for most college courses, work-based learning settings and 'decent' jobs, greater supervision of ho
defaultmework by teachers
default 
defaultto minimise the risk that student disengage as a result of falling behind and feeling overwhelmed by coursework, provision of additional study support
default, close monitoring of student truancy etc. 
default(e.g. Ross, 2009)
default.
default13. 
defaultHowever it is importa
defaultnt that addressing low educational attainment 
defaultis not just a question of disengagement age 11-16 or 
defaultan 
defaultissue 
defaultjust 
defaultfor secondary schools. 
defaultT
defaulthe low achievem
defaultent of White British students on
default FSM 
defaulthas been
default identif
defaulti
defaulted as early as age 4, and these students fall furt
defaulther behind age 4-7 (Strand, 1999), age 7-11 (Strand, 
default2010, 
default2014b) as well as age 11-16 (Strand, 2014a). In short equity differences in achievement are just as much a concern for primary schooling as for secondary schooling. 
default14. 
defaultIt is also important that s
defaultchools are not seen as the sole agencies 
defaultof
default change.
default 
defaultDifferences between schools, while they undoubtedly play some role, a
defaultppear
default unlikely to be the major locus of equity gaps in pupils’ educational progress. 
defaultStrand (2010) reports an analysis of pupil progres
defaults age 7-11 using national data from 534,000 pupils attending over 14,000 primary schools. 
defaultWhile the SES and the White British-Black Caribbean gaps widen between age 7 and age 11, these gaps do not appear to be significantly greater
default in some schools than in 
defaultothers
default. 
defaultNo schools reliably reversed the usual ‘within school’ pattern of FSM students making less progress than non-FSM students, or Black Caribbean students making less progress than White British students.
default 
defaultThis has two major implications:
defaulti
default.
default              
default Equity gaps are not the result of a small number of 'failing' schools which, if they can somehow be fixed, will remove
default the overall SES or ethnic achievement 
defaultgaps. 
defaultWhile qualitative research has provided case studies of schools in disadvantaged areas that 
default‘succeed 
defaultagainst the odds’ (e.g. 
defaultDCSF Extra Mile project, 2008), such schools are by definition exceptions. As Mortimore and Whitty (1997) observe “whilst some schools can succeed against the odds, the possibility of them all doing so, year in and year out
default, still appears remote given that the long-term patterning of educational inequality has been strikingly consistent throughout the history of public education in most countries” (p9).  Similarly in the US Rothstein (2004) has cogently argued that, exemplar
defaulty though such schools might be, they do not represent scalable models for Americ
defaulta’s poor and minority children.
default 
defaultii
default.
default              
defaultNeither is a 
defaultfocus on 
defaultgeneral 
default'
defaultschool improvement
default'
default suffic
defaulti
defaultent. While the most effective schools 
defaultdo 
defaultraise the achievement of disadvantaged p
defaultupil
defaults, non-disadvantaged pupils tend to 
defaultbenefit just as much, so that these school do not eliminate the achievement gap. 
defaultThe correlation between a schools' residual (i.e. difference from the expected value) for FSM pupils correlated 0.97 with the school
defaults'
default 
defaultresidual for non-FSM pupils. The results are shown in Figure 4. Thus p
defaultrimary schools that added the most value for White British students, girls or those not on FSM also added the most value for Black Caribbean students, boys or pupils on FSM
default.
default 
defaultIn short the
default relative performance of the disadvantaged remains similar even when the absolute performance of such groups has improved (Mortimore &amp; Whitty, 1997; Strand, 2010, 2014b).
defaultFigure 4: Correlation of defaultprimary schools' Contextual Value Added (CVA) residuals defaultfor defaultpupils entitled to FSM and those not defaultentitled to defaultFSMdefaultSource: Strand (2010).
default15. These results do not deny the possibility that processes occuring
default within schools and classrooms may contribute to the poor progress of disadvantaged pupils or some ethnic minority groups, but does imply that such processes would need to be operating consistently across all schools. For example recent research suggests t
defaulthat setting is on the rise within primary schools in England, with a recent nationally representative survey indicating that over one-third of children in Y2 were set in literacy, mathematics or both, and that
default 
defaultlow SES children were disproportionally repres
defaultented in bottom sets  (Hallam &amp; Ireson, 2013). Setting has been hypothesised to increase within school gaps for disadvantaged and ethnic minority students (
defaulte.g. 
defaultWiliam &amp; Bartholomew, 200
default4; Oakes, 2005
default). Another possible candidate is the distribution of tea
defaultchers across classrooms 
defaultwithin
default schools, with research from the US indicating that Black and disadvantaged students were more likely to be matched to novice teachers while more highly qualified teachers were matched to White and more advantaged students (Cl
defaultotfelter, Ladd &amp; Vigor, 2005). They suggest this reflects both pressure from more affluent parents to secure better resources for their children and the greater power of more experienced teachers to lobby for more easy-to-educate students
default.
default16. defaultThe key impldefaultication of the defaultabove is thatdefault defaultalldefault schools need to focus on their 'within-school' gaps and that defaultidefaultnterventiondefaultsdefault defaultneed to be defaulttargeteddefault at disadvantaged studentsdefault.default This is the great hope for the Pupil Premium. 
defaultThis delivers greater funding to schools 
defaultwith high prop
defaultortions of disadvantaged students 
defaultin a transparent manner. 
defaultIt also comes with t
defaulthe 
defaultexpectation
default that 
default 
defaultthe 
defaultgrant will be used to support FSM eligible pupils, should focus on 
defaultclos
defaulting
default 
defaultthe gap
default in attainment
default between them and their peers,
default and 
defaultaccountability measures such as 
defaultthe publication of the FSM gap in
default school performance tables (
default although it is 
defaultimportant that schools are accountable for the 
defaultprogress
default of their students not for 'raw' attainment ou
defaulttcomes
default)
default. 
default 
default17. 
defaultS
defaultince the demise of grammar school system 
defaultin the late 1960's 
defaulteducational policy in England 
defaulthas
default, for good reason, 
default been wary of differentiat
defaulting educational provision 
defaultat 
defaulttoo early 
defaultan age 
defaultfor fear of 
defaultexacerbating social 
defaultinequality. 
defaultCertainly
default sorting
default students into separate schools at age 11 or age 14 is to be avoided
default, since the 
defaultevidence suggests this 
defaultsuch differentiation tends to reproduce social
default inequality rather than eliminate it (e.g. Willis, 1977)
default. 
defaultNevertheless the evidence on disengagement of WWC students, particularly age 14-16, 
defaultreviewed in Section 4 above 
defaultsuggests that providing all students with the same curriculum in KS4 fails to meet the
default 
defaultdesire
default of a significant minority for 
defaultlearning that makes a strong connection between the academic and the world of work. It i
defaults a matter of some regret that the statutory duty of schools to provide work related learning (WRL) 
defaultat KS4 
defaultwas removed in Septembe
defaultr 2012. 
defaultT
defaulthe raising of the school leaving age to 17 
defaultin 
defaultSeptemb
defaulter
default 2012
default, and to age 18 in September 2015, 
defaultmay move a
defaultttention 
defaultto 
default16-19
default years olds
default, but strong programme
defaults
default of WRL at KS4 should continue to be a focus for all schools, particularly
default those 
defaultserving 
defaultdisadvantaged communities
default.
defaultClotfelter, C. T., Ladd, H. F., &amp; Vigdor, J. (2005). Who teaches whom? Race and the distribution of novice teachers. 
defaultEconomics of Education Review, 24
default(4), 377-392.
defaultCroll, P. (2009). Educational participation post-16: A
default longitudinal analysis of intentions and outcomes. 
defaultBritish Journal of Educational Studies, 57
default(4), 400-416. 
defaultDCSF. (2008). 
defaultThe extra mile: How schools succeed in raising aspirations in deprived communities. Ref 00447-2008BKT-EN.
default London: Department for Schoo
defaultls, Children and Families.
defaultHallam, S., &amp; Parsons, S. (2013). The incidence and make up of ability grouped sets in the UK primary school. 
defaultResearch Papers in Education, 28
default(4), 393-420
default.
defaultKao, G., &amp;
default Thompson, J. S. (2003). Racial and ethnic stratification in educational achievement and attainment. 
defaultAnnual Review of Sociology, 29
default(1), 417-442.
defaultKintrea, K., St. Clair, R., &amp; Houston, M. (2011). 
defaultThe influence of parents, places and poverty on educational a
defaultttitudes and aspirations
default. York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.
default 
defaultMortimore, P., &amp; Whitty, G. (1997). 
defaultCan school improvement overcome the effects of disadvantage?
default London: Institute of Education.
defaultOakes, J. (2005). 
defaultKeeping Track: How Schools Structure Inequality 
default(2nd Edition)
default. New Haven: Yale University Press.
defaultRoss, A. (2009). 
defaultDisengagement from education among 14-16 year olds. DCSF Research Report RR178.
default London: Department for Children, Schools and Families.
defaultRothstein, R. (2004). 
defaultClass and Schools: Using Social, 
defaultEconomic, and Educational Reform to Close the Achievement Gap
default: Economic Policy Institute, Washington.
defaultStrand, S. (
default2014b
default). School effects and ethnic, gender and socio-economic gaps in educational achievement at age 11. 
defaultOxford Review of Education, in press.
default 
default[[The pap
defaulter will not be published until April
default 2014 but a copy can be downloaded here: 
defaulthttp://oxford.academia.edu/SteveStrand
default]
defaultStrand, S. (
default2014a
default). Ethnicity, gender, social class and achievement gaps at age 16: Intersectionality
default and ‘Getting it’ for the white working class. 
defaultResearch Papers in Education, in press.
default 
default[The paper will not be published u
defaultntil 
defaultJanuary
default 2014 but a copy can be downloaded here: 
defaulthttp://oxford.academia.edu/SteveStrand
default]
defaultStrand, S. (2010). Do some schools narrow 
defaultthe gap? Differential school effectiveness by ethnicity, gender, poverty and prior attainment.
default School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 21, (3), 289-314
default. 
defaulthttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/092434510037326
default51
default.
defaultStrand, S. (1999). Ethnic group, sex and economic disadvantage: Associations with pupils’ educational progress from Baseline to the end of Key Stage 1. 
defaultBritish Educational Research Journal, 25, (2), 179-202. 
defaulthttp://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0141192990250204
default.
defaultStrand, S. &amp; Winston, J. (2008). Educational aspirations in inner city schools.
default Educational Studies, 34, (4), 249-267. 
defaulthttp://dx.doi.org/
default10.1080/03055690802034021
defaultWiliam, D., &amp; Bartholomew, H. (2004). It's not which school but which set you're in that matters: The influence of ability grouping practices on student progress in mathematics. 
defaultBritish Educational Research Journal, 30
default(2), 279-
default293.
defaultWillis, P. (1977). 
defaultLearning to Labour: How working class kids get working class jobs
default. Farnborough: Saxon House.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default . The LSYPE is a longitudinal study of over 15,000 young people first interviewed at age 14 in 2004 and currently being interviewed at age 25. The sample have been matched to the National Pupil Database to provide test and examination results at age 11 (2
default001), age 14 (2004) and age 16 (2006). 
default. Considerable attention has been attracted by a study by Kintrea, St. Clair &amp; Houston (2011) suggesting that aspirations are universally high among students from disadvantaged backgrounds. However their study inter
defaultviewed students from only three schools in high deprivation areas, and does not actually report data on educational aspirations noting only that "these findings did not vary significantly by any of the social factors we examined" (Kintrea et al, 2011, p27)
default. As Kintrea et al themselves note "given this research set out to focus on people living with deprivation, it is not surprising that significant differentials by family economic status was not found. There was not a wide socioeconomic range among our part
defaulticipants" (p53). The LSYPE data in contrast are drawn from a nationally representative sample of over 15,000 students across over 600 schools. Social class differences in educational aspirations are quite robust and have been reported in other analyses of 
defaultthe LSYPE (e.g. Ross, 2009), with other representative surveys such as the youth component of the British Household Panel Survey (Croll, 2009). 
default