Written evidence submitted by defaultPaul Bowen QCdefault, Doughty Street Chambers (LAI 009)default “The maintenance of the rule of law is in every way as important in a free society as the democratic franchise.  In our society the rule of law rests upon twin foundations: the Sovereignty of the Queen in Parliament in making the law and the s
defaultovereignty of the Queen’s courts in interpreting and applying the law” (Lord Bridge of Harwich, X v Morgan-Grampian Ltd [1991] AC 1, 48).  
default‘Extractive political institutions concentrate power in the hands
default of a narrow elite and place few constraints on the exercise of this power. Economic institutions are then often structured by this elite to extract resources from the rest of society (in other words, they exist in order to enrich the elite by ensuring the
default transfer of society’s wealth into their hands, or overseas bank accounts).
default“... the
default State has to provide fair and clear laws equally applicable to all, 
defaulta legal system readily available to all, and an effective and efficient court structure readily accessible to all
default. It must, in other words, secure the rule of law.  And here we see the li
defaultnk back to inclusive political institutions: only they can effectively guarantee the rule of law, which itself underpins the growth of inclusive economic institutions. As they have it, the institutions of inclusive states operate as a virtuous circle.”
default (Em
defaultphasis added)
default‘... the governance of the state is a prime concern of the rule of law: government beyond law is tyranny.
default  ... [I]f the judges are not prepared to speak for it, a constitution is nothing.  Stalin’s successive constitutions for the USSR set out rows of shining rights, but with courts that lacked the means or the will or both to make anything of them they prote
defaultcted nobody and left the political executive in undisputed command of society.’
default“It is of course true that the judges in
default this country are not elected and are not answerable to Parliament.  It is also of course true ... that Parliament, the executive and the courts have different functions.  But the function of independent judges charged to interpret and apply the law is uni
defaultversally recognised as a cardinal feature of the modern democratic state, a cornerstone of the rule of law itself.  The Attorney General is fully entitled to insist on the proper limits of judicial authority, but he is wrong to stigmatise judicial decision
default-making as in some way undemocratic.”
default‘Every person within the jurisdiction enjoys the equal protection of 
defaultour laws.  There is no distinction between British nationals and others.  He who is subject to English law is entitled to its protection’.  
default‘If the rule of law is to mean anything it has to mean that the prison system is no less answerable to the Courts than any other limb of the state’.  
default“
default... 
defaulta statutory instrument is the instrument of the minister ... who is empowered by the enabling Act to make it’.  
default24 September 2013
default1
default&#xa0;
default  
defaultFrom Barretry, Maintenance and Champerty
default to Litigation Funding Harbour Litigation Funding First Annual Lecture Lord Neuberger, President of The Supreme Court Gray’s Inn, 9 May 2013
default ‘Ashes and Sparks: Essays on Law and Justice’, (2011), Cambridge University Press 
default 
default‘Prison Law’, Owen, Livingst
defaultone &amp; McDonald, (2008) 4
defaultth
default ed. (Oxford Universtity Press)
default