&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the National Pensioners Conventiondefault (TIC 108)default1. INTRODUCTION
default1.1 The National Pensioners Convention (NPC) is Britain's largest pensioner organisation 
defaultrepresenting around 1.5m older people, active in over 1000 affiliated groups. The NPC is run by 
defaultand for pensioners and campaigns for improvements to their income, health and welfare.
default1.2 This outline submission by P.G.Rayner FCILT and Vice President of NPC
default is not detailed as NPC 
defaultis not resourced for a detailed submission of this complexity.
default1.3. Whilst recognising the Inquiry is not focused solely on older people it must be recognised 
defaultthat older people make up a substantial user of Rural Transport.
default2 
defaultSPECIFIC QUESTIONS. (Bullet points 1 to 6)
default2.1. As stated in 1.2 above it is not possible to answer the specifics without considerable 
defaultresearch. That research NPC is trying to commission if funds (3k) can be found. The need is to 
defaultestablish the position nat
defaultionwide because the provision varies location by location with regard 
defaultto what is loosely described as "Community Transport". In some places this is free, in others a 
defaultcharge is made, albeit to cover costs of volunteer people et al. Nevertheless it means in 
defaulteffect 
defaultthat a disabled or PRM (Person of reduced Mobility) older citizen is disadvantaged as the use of 
defaultthe Bus Pass is not permitted on many community transport schemes.
default2.2 Local Bus and sometimes Train Services are reduced and this is happening at the s
defaultame time as Post Offices are closing along with other previously provide facilities, drop in centres, local 
defaultgroup meetings, all of which funds are being withdrawn from.
default2.3 With the cessation of Taxi card, Dial a Ride, Post Bus etc. which co
defaultmpounds many of the 
defaultproblems it means the most vulnerable in society are disadvantaged.
default2.4 The summation of the questions posed by the Committee lead inexorably to one question, 
defaultthat of cost. Setting aside clichés like "Main Challenges" and " Identify Demand" the real 
defaultquestion is Bullet Point 6 which comes down simply to how do you fund transport in isolated 
defaultcommunities.
default2.5 The simple answer is that society has to accept that giv
defaulte older people Inclusion and the 
defaultprovision of adequate transport is part of that Inclusion, they are able to contribute.
default2.6 Not all older people are without some disposable income which they will spend in the Towns 
defaultand villages, if they can get there. Older person's health and well-being is better which is a cost 
defaultbenefit to NHS. Car usage is reduced which has environmental advantages.
default2.7 Most importantly by the mobility Inclusion brings older people do much voluntee
defaultr work of 
defaultgreat financial benefit to the wider society.
default2.8 Attached is some research solely directed at assessing that value. It is acknowledged that 
defaultthe example is not of a rural nature but the principle is the same. There are also other erudite 
defaultexamples
default of research which are available to illustrate this point.
default2.9 It is essential adequate Rural Transport is provide for if by that Inclusion older people are 
defaultable to leave their homes they will not be seen as tomorrows problem but part of tomorrows 
defaultsolution
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default