&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by The Royal Academy of Engineering (GSH0006)default&#xa0;
defaultThe Royal Academy of Engineering welcomes the Science and Technology Committee’s call for evidence on Government Horizon Scanning. Please find the Academy’s response to the House of Commons questions in the following document. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Academy carries out regular in-depth studies in order to gauge the value of new technologies to government and the wider public and the implications these new developments have on standards and regulations. The Academy also engages in studies that asse
defaultss and point the way to mitigating risks related to natural hazards or technology failure, such as our Extreme Space Weather (2013) and Global Navigational Satellite Systems (2011).   
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Academy has recently held a roundtable discussion on 3D printing a
defaultnd additive manufacturing that was attended by industry representatives, government officials, researchers and Fellows of the Academy. Issues regarding the regulation of these new technologies and the policy challenges presented are noted in the following 
defaultcall for evidence.  
default&#xa0;
defaultAs a key aspect of government horizon scanning, the Academy would like to note the important role that European-wide consortia of science and engineering Academies play in international horizon scanning and the valuable role the Chief
default Scientific Advisor to the President of the European Commission has in leadership of European-level horizon scanning activates. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default1. How do Government departments make use of horizon scanning?
default1.1 The Royal Academy of Engineering and its Fellows play a number of roles in horizon scanning.  The Academy carries out regular in-depth studies that look at the likely development and use of technologies and how they will affect 
defaultpolicy and impact on the
default public
default. Examples of these include 
defaultDilemmas of Privacy and Surveillance
default published in 2007, which set out a technology roadmap for surveillance and data processing technologies and 
defaultElectric Vehicles
default, published in 2010, which looks at the future roll out of 
defaultEVs and the preconditions for mass uptake. The Academy also engages in studies 
defaultthat
default assess 
defaultand point the way to mitigating 
defaultrisks related to natural hazards or technology failure, such as our 
defaultExtreme Space Weather 
default(2013) and 
defaultGlobal Navigational Satellite Sy
defaultstems 
default(2011).   
default1.2 Both of these kinds of studies are designed to be relevant to government
default. In some cases, government makes direct use of such advice; in others, the impact and influence needs to be worked through with government departments.
default It 
defaultcan be
default 
defaultchalleng
defaulting
default for external organisations to ensure that 
defaultpolicy advice
default reach
defaultes
default the right people 
defaultin a timely fashion, which is why the Academy works to develop its working relationships across government
default. 
defaultHowever, the pathways for internal
default dissemination of 
defaultsuc
defaulth work are not always clear.
default 
default1.3 It is our view that government could make more use of such independent, expert horizon scanning, and the Academy makes efforts to work with partners in government to support this. An example of where the Academy has had su
defaultccess in disseminating its foresight work is with the 
defaultExtreme Space Weather
default study which has been taken on board by the Natural Hazards and Civil Contingencies unit within Cabinet Office, where officials 
defaultare working
default with the Academy to 
defaulttake forward 
default recomme
defaultndations.
default1.4 Another example of government successfully using the horizon scanning activities of the Academy and other professional organisations is through direct partnership
default.  In 2011, 
defaultDefra 
defaultinvited the alliance of engineering professional organisation,
default 
defaultEngineering the Future
default, 
defaultwhich is hosted by the Academy, to participate in a project to identify the interdependencies of adapting infrastructure to climate change.  This
default resulted in the report 
defaultEngineering, Infrastructure and Climate Change 
defaultAdaptation. 
defaultHer
defaulte, the work of engineers on the future risks to infrastructure was part of a broad, government activity on adaptation to climate change.
default1.5 However it is very difficult for the Academy, or indeed any independent organisation, to judge just how this expert
default advice is used. While we have the examples of clear and successful collaboration above, in other areas there is less obvious engagement. 
default1.6 It is likely that a clearer remit for horizon scanning across government, as set out in the Day 
defaultR
defaulteview, would hel
defaultp organisations such as the Academy provide horizon scanning work that is useful to, and usable by, government and to develop relationships with partners in government. A process by which there is a post-report check to establish what changes have been mad
defaulte by government, or reasons why actions were not taken, would show how government has made use of horizon scanning work and would allow informed judgement of whether it makes effective use of independent and internal research.
default 
defaultWhile the stated process migh
defaultt be difficult to achieve, even feedback on relevance and quality of a report could be helpful
default.
default2. How effective is horizon scanning in Government? Do Ministers and senior officials consider horizon scanning outputs appropriately?
default2.1 As noted above, it is
default not felt that horizon scanning outputs are used as effectively as they could be, or that there is obvious follow up on the recommendations made in horizon scanning activities. It is also felt that individual departments’ efforts at horizon scanning have b
defaulteen uncoordinated and sometimes mutually contradictory.
default2.2 One challenge for government departments is that they receive a wealth of external reports, which unfortunately are only useful if they reach the appropriate senior civil servant at exactly the ri
defaultght time due to the precise government timetables they work to. Reports can only be of real benefit if they are on an agenda set by Ministers or by external events.
default&#xa0;
defaultFor this reason, better on
default-
defaultgoing communications between government and the external bodies 
defaultthat can produce valuable horizon scanning is needed to ensure that information is received when it is of use.
default2.3 A key tool in horizon 
defaultscanning is scenario planning. 
defaultEffective horizon scanning by government would involve setting out possible scenarios wh
defaultich are not predictions or even extrapolations, but are credible possible futures against which government could 
defaultsay that, if this scenario were to arise, the legislative and policy actions needed would be X, Y and Z.
default&#xa0;
defaultUnfortunately scenario planning has a 
defaultchequered history in 
defaultg
defaultovernment 
defaultd
defaultepartments 
defaultand is considered as labour intensive for policy-makers.
default2.4 In terms of technological foresight, the relevant technical expertise to deliver
default tends to be found within the public delivery agencies rather than cent
defaultral 
defaultg
defaultovernment (there are more 
defaultprofessional
default engineers in Ofgem than there are in DECC, for example). 
default&#xa0;
defaultMany issues that could benefit from foresight are dealt with by the devolved administrations, with, for example,
default&#xa0;
defaultTfL in contact with the cutting edge 
defaultof technology rather than DfT. 
defaultSome of the 'strategic' machinery to support central government processes such as the 
defaultS
defaultustainable 
defaultD
defaultevelopment 
defaultC
defaultommission and especially the No 10 Strategy Unit have been dismantled by the current coalition 
defaultG
defaultovernment.
default2.5 
defaultWit
defaulthin the European Union's research funding system, the upcoming Eighth Framework Programme, Horizon 2020, is oriented around a challenge model in which funding is used to solve societal problems by bridging the gap between research and market applications, 
defaultfor example by assisting  innovative enterprises in developing breakthrough technologies into commercial products capable of succeeding in the market. By definition
default,
default this model necessitates the scoping of future challenges, which is welcome. However, detai
defaultls of how this horizon scanning will be done and who will do it remain unclear. Also unclear are the time horizons along which it will take place and the role of domestic member-state horizon scanning capabilities in informing the European process.
default2.6 
defaultAno
defaultther area of interest from a European perspective is the role of the Chief Scientific Advisor (CSA) to the President of the European Commission. This function is still new to the Commission: the first Chief Scientific Advisor, Professor Anne Glover, was ap
defaultpointed in December 2011. Though the role is still in its early stages and appears to involve little formal horizon scanning activity, one of the future roles of a stronger, more institutionalised Chief Scientific Advisor could be participation in or leade
defaultrship of European-level horizon scanning activities. To achieve this
default,
default the CSA role would have to be extended beyond the lifetime of the current President, which is currently a likelihood but not yet a certainty. Moreover, the post would have to be given gr
defaulteater resources and stronger influence in the setting of priorities for research funding and other European-wide scientific and technical activities. 
default2.7 
defaultAnother prospective player in European-wide horizon scanning activities are European-wide consortia o
defaultf science and engineering Academies, many of which leverage the unique skills and experience of their Fellowships to conduct high-quality horizon scanning domestically. For example, the European Council of Applied Sciences Technologies and Engineering (Eur
defaulto-CASE), a consortium of national engineering Academies of which the Royal Academy of Engineering is part, is working to establish avenues for advising European policy in a systematic and long-term way, using horizon scanning and other approaches to provid
defaulte timely, objective, evidence-based advise to the European Commission. The use of such consortia by the Commission would enable it to benefit from the accumulated knowledge of the EU's most senior scientists and engineer
defaults and to ensure that the advice
default 
defaultrece
defaultived 
defaultis objective and representative of a broad con
defaultstituency of European experts. 
default3. What changes could be made to improve existing horizon scanning activity? Will the recommendations made in Jon Day’s review of cross-government horizon scanning capabilit
defaulty address current shortcomings? What progress has been made implementing these?
default3.1 The Day review focus
defaultes on Cabinet Office as a potential lead and locus for horizon scanning.  This is a clear choice, and there is already good use of expert analysis withi
defaultn Cabinet Office
default. Putting Cabinet O
defaultffice at the centre of horizon scanning should 
defaultalso 
defaulthelp support cross-departmental activity
default. However the review gives less recognition to the central role of Go-Science and the CSAs than would be expected. 
defaultFor 
defaultgovernment, i
defaultt is important that the role of science and engineering in understanding future risks and assessing resilience, preparedness and risk management strategies is fully appreciated. Science and technology are not only important for technology hori
defaultzon scanning, but for identifying broader future scenarios and the factors that influence them and for dealing appropriately with the uncertainty and risk measures in horizon scanning.
default3.2 The Day review notes the role of academia and think tanks in the ho
defaultrizon scanning processes of government, and we would add that the national academies
default, research councils
default and professional bodies such as engineering institutions and learned societies also have a key role to play.
default3.3 The value of involving independent advi
defaultce in horizon scanning is that, if organisations perform their own horizon scanning, they are bound to constrain the horizon relative to their experience and knowledge of the organisation. Horizon scanning should be carried out in an environment that is op
defaulten to challenge and includes the views of those outside of the civil service and government. Improvements to existing horizon scanning capability require involvement of truly independent experts and openness to the challenges they may present. 
default3.4 As noted above, science and technology expertise is crucial for scenario planning. The solutions available 
defaultfor
default any problem are highly dependent on how the problem is specified. Narrow specifications 
defaultthat 
defaultdo not correctly incorporate uncertainty effects
default will produce solutions which are limited in their usefulness. Uncertainty is sometimes not very well incorporated in analysis and it is likely that scientists, engineers and technologists well versed with dealing with uncertainty can produce more accurate
default results.
default4. How effective is the Government at responding to policy or regulatory challenges presented by new technologies?
default4.1 There is an intrinsic challenge in creating policy and regulation for emerging technologies. 
defaultIt is difficult for regulation to 
defaultkeep pace with technology
default al
defaultthough there is very often a 
defaultneed for a 
defaultsymbiotic relationship between developing technologies and 
defaultthe 
defaultregulatory 
defaultmachinery to allow a technology to develop, such as a
defaultutonomous vehicles
default. W
defaultithout a regulatory context
default,
default it is diffi
defaultcult for industry to invest in developing products 
defaultthat
default may or may not be permitted for use.  The Academy report 
defaultAutonomous Systems: social, legal and ethical issues
default 
default(2009) 
defaultset
defaults 
defaultout this challenge.
default4.2 In the case of 3D printing however, regulation becomes necessary through the application of the technology – if it can be used to produce controlled items or infringes intellectual property rights. We would not want all technical development to be prec
defaulteded and potentially stifled by regulation but equally well we would not want the development of 
defaultother technologies
default to be held up because of the lack of it.
default&#xa0;
default 
default4.3 
defaultFor government, p
defaultarliamentary timescales and the need for primary legislation probably contri
defaultbute to this reactive position, but a robust system of horizon scanning should allow government to be better prepared for the emergence and uptake of new technologies.
default4.4
default Stronger candidates for horizon scanning te
defaultnd to be infrastructure based - energy, t
defaultransport, water
default and communications 
default–
default 
defaultand 
defaultby implication
default,
default this should involve the UK regulators more fully
default. F
defaultor example Ofcom Broadband has finalised a clear regulatory framework to promote investment, competition and innovation.
default5. Case studies:
defaultWhat are (or were) the policy challenges presented by this technology? How have these challenges been identified?
default5.1 The Royal Academy of Engineering recently held a roundtable meeting on 3
defaultD
default printing and additive manufacturing and its potential impact on UK industry. The key challenges for this sector of manufacturing with an impact on policy were:
default5.2 These issues have been identified by groups such as the Work Foundation and Big Innovation Centre at the University of Lancaster, whose report 
defaultThree Dimensional Policy: Why Britain needs a policy framework for 3D printing
default articulated many of these policy issues. See: 
defaulthttp://www.th
defaulteworkfoundation.com/DownloadPublication/Report/322_3D%20printing%20paper_FINAL_15%20Oct.pdf
defaultHow prepared is (or was) the Government to react to challenges presented by this technology? How effective was this reaction?
default5.3 The Academy is aware that Gover
defaultnment is supporting this new sector within manufacturing through BIS funding of the High Value Manufacturing Catapult network, with £200 million in funding across 7 centres. The Technology Strategy Board and the Research Councils have run competitions to s
defaulttimulate the exploration of new design freedoms in 3d printing. 
defaultWhat are (or were) the policy challenges presented by this technology? How have these challenges been identified?
default5.4 The 
defaultRoyal Academy of Engineering published a report in 2009 on the social, legal and ethical issues relating to autonomous systems including transport. The report identified the following policy issues:
default5.5 This area of technology is still in the relatively early stages
default of development.  However, there have been developments in the understanding of intelligent transport systems, as set out in the 
defaultIntelligent Mobility 
defaultstudy carried out by the Automotive Council, which is supported by BIS: 
defaulthttp://www.automotivecouncil.co.uk/intelligent-mobility/
default5.6 Foresight also carried out a detailed study on intelligent infrastructure in 2005: 
defaulthttp://www.bis.gov.uk/foresight/our-work/projects/published-projects/intelligent-infrastructure-systems
default 
defaultHow prepared is (or was) the Government to react to challenges presented by this technology? How effecti
defaultve was this reaction?
default5.7 This area of technology is in relatively early stages and it is difficult to make claims about government’s response at this point. 
default5.8 In the case of Autonomous Road Vehicles, it would be easier to look at the air or rail sector
defaults first, which are already highly regulated and easier technical. 
defaultThe rail industry produced a set of scenarios a few years ago that illustrate the process well, and it would be valuable to carry out such scenario planning for autonomous road vehicles and 
defaultintelligent transport infrastructure. It is certainly essential for relevant scenarios to be explored before the technologies mature. 
defaultNo comment.
defaultSeptember 2103
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default