Written evidence submitted by defaultHelendefault defaultMountfielddefault QCdefault,default (LAI 0015)default&#xa0;defaultOVERVIEWdefault1.  
defaultI am a QC in private practice 
defaultspecialising in administrative and constitutional law.   I was called to the Bar in 1991 and took silk in 2010.   Before taking silk I was on the Treasury A Panel.   I have appeared bo
defaultth for and against public authorities
default  in 
defaultall courts of
default England and Wale
defaults, the CJEU and the ECtHR.   For example, I represented the Lord Chancellor in  
defaultWilkinson v Kitzinger (Lord Chancellor &amp; Attorney General Intervening) 
default 
default[2006] EWHC 2002 
defaultFam as to the compatibility of the Civil Partnerships Act 2005 with human rights legisl
defaultation
default.   I sit as a civil recorder and a Deputy High Court judge in the Administrative Court.  
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultThis 
defaultpaper is my 
defaultpersonal 
defaultsubmiss
defaultion on the implications 
defaultof the government's civil legal aid proposals, set out in its response to the consultation exercise
default, 
defaultTransforming Legal Aid: Next Steps. 
default&#xa0;
default3
default.  In my view, the proposed changes
default to legal aid
default are a serious thre
defaultat to the rule of law
default.  They will, if introduced, undermine
default the right of
default access to justice
default: 
default in particular, access to justice to challenge improper state action, for some of society's most vulnerable people, and those most vulnerable to abuse of state power (for example, those in its custody).
default4
default.  
defaultTh
defaulte
default declared premise of the 
defaultTransforming Legal Ai
defaultd Proposals 
default&#xad;
default 
defaultis 
defaultthat a fair justice system with 'fair outcomes' is essential in our democratic society, and that legal aid is the 'hallmark of a fair, open justice system'.
default  The same has long been recognised by the European Court of Human Rights and other
default European constitutional courts
default.   Access to legal aid as a gateway to access to justice  is especially important when litigation is brought by a subject of st
defaultate action, to challenge the legality of it
default.   Since 
default 
defaultjudicial review is the means by which cour
defaultts restrain the executive when it acts outside the law, access to judicial review is essential to the rule of law and executive accountability.
default5.   The Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 
default(LASPO) 
defaultalready severely limits legal aid fo
defaultr judicial review.  The government acknowledges that the scope for further savings is very small.  Nevertheless, only eight days after LASPO came into force, the Ministry of Justice published proposals which would further remove legal aid for judicial 
defaultrevi
defaultew, in ways and to a point at which would undermine the effective availability of judicial review and its constitutional purpose
default.
default  These changes have not been significantly amended, in response to overwhelming concern expressed in response to the consulta
defaulttion.
default6
default.  
defaultA serious feature of the proposals is their intention to remove access to legal aid (and by necessary implication, access to the courts) for groups of people defined by status.   
defaultA
defaultnother serious feature is their apparent 'ideological' 
defaultopposition 
defaultto
default judicial review which underpin
defaults the proposed changes
default, and the apparent desire to put much state activity beyond court scrutiny by way of judicial review
default.   It has not been disputed that the measures will
default, even on the Ministry of Justice's most 
defaultoptimistic view, save very little (£6 million).  Careful figures illustrating that the 'reforms' will
default cost far more than they will save
default have not been disputed
default.  (Indeed the cost of implementing a test where a recipient of legal aid services must prove a pe
defaultriod of past lawful residence will be almost unworkably complex and costly).  
default7.  
defaultThe 
default principal purpose of the civil legal aid proposals appears to be the 
defaultSecretary of State's intention to cut down on use of judicial review
default.  However, the means chosen to
default achieve this end are not aimed at the cases with low prospects of success, but at particular categories of case, chosen by reference to characteristics of intended litigants, and measures which will prevent 
defaultany 
default case, no matter how meritorious, from being
default pursued at a profit. Public statements by the Secretary of State indicate that he perceives judicial review to be 
defaultimproperl
defaulty used as a tool of political opposition.    This is 
defaultbased on a misunderstanding of the approach taken by the courts, which are astu
defaultte to 
defaultkeep within their proper constitutional realm, but are an essential check upon misuse of public power where it is exercised unlawfully or improperly.
default7
default.  
defaultThe proposals - particularly when read in conjunction with the parallel consultation 
defaultJudicial Re
defaultview: Proposals for Further Reform 
default (6 September 2013)  mean that the base of specialist legal suppliers of social welfare law is likely to be removed.   
defaultThese are not 'fat-cat' lawyers: the equity partners in many successful London legal aid practices are
default paid less than teachers or senior nurses.   
defaultThe proposed legal aid changes are likely to lead to whole-sale exit from the market, and the experience and expertise lost  will not, therefore, be capable of being replaced  if, 
defaultas seems likely, 
defaultmany suppliers
default cease to provide
default such services altogether 
defaultin the light of the proposed
default changes
default.
default8.  The 
defaultobvious adverse impact of the 
defaultproposals 
defaultfor operation of our justice system has
default generated serious concern across the profession, including from 
defaultthose who act primarily
default 
defaultfor 
default public authorities
default, and judges
default.
default It is not insignificant that former House of Lords and Supreme Court judges have expressed themselves in such anxious terms in relation to the proposals
default.  Lord Brown (a former Treasury Devil) questioned whether the p
defaultroposals were compatible with the Lord Chancellor's duties under section 1 Constitutional Reform Act; Lord Hope (the recently retired Vice President of the Supreme Court) said that 
default              
default"I find it hard to believe that a government which truly respected the ru
defaultle of law - 
default              
defaultwhich had taken the trouble to understand what that phrase really means, and to 
default              
defaultstudy the
default 
defaultconsequences of what it has in mind - would have contemplated 
default              
defaultintroducing the [civil legal aid proposals]".
defaultLord Scott said that respect for the rule of law is 
default"cultural ... it is not to be found in every country and it is not immutable. ... Respect for the rule of law is capable of being forfeited and lost if excessive cuts are made affecting potential litigan
defaultts .. It cannot be taken fo
defaultr granted by the Government that that will not happen and I hope they will keep that in mind".
default9.   It is also almost inconceivable that the government's proposals are compatible with EU law
default (Article 47 of the Charter of Rights),
default Articles 6 and 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights
default and Article 15 of the UN Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women
default.  Adoption of these proposals 
defaultwould undermine the existence 
defaultof the justice system which our constitutional 
defaulttradition and our international law obligations demand.
default10.   In short, the implications of the proposals to ref
defaultorm civil legal aid
default amount, in many cases, to effective removal of access to 
defaultmechanisms of redress against unlawful state action
default.  The
default 
defaultproposals
default 
defaultundermine 
defaultacc
defaultess to justice
default, public accountability and the rule of law.  These 
defaultform 
default the
default roots of a democratic society
default, and the proposals, in undermining these, undermine democracy
default.  
default&#xa0;defaultTHE RESIDENCE TESTdefault11.  The proposal is to exclude from  civil legal 
defaultaid
default eligibility
default those who cannot show twelve months lawful residence and those not lawfully present in the United Kingdom.    Note that the onus will be on the person seeking help - perhaps urgently - to demonstrate
default eligibility
default, by
default providing documentary pr
defaultoof
default.
default   Anyone who cannot demonstrate the requisite period of lawful residence 
default 
defaultwill be unable to access legal advice or representation, no matter how 
defaulturgent or 
defaultacute their need for help
default.
default12.  The
default proposal
default to introduce a residence test
default undermines the
default principle of equality before the law:  
default"Every person within the jurisdiction enjoys the equal protection of our laws.   There is no distinction between British nationals and others.  He who is subject to English law 
defaultis entitled to its protection"
default per Lo
defaultrd Scarman in 
defaultKhjawaja 
default [1984] AC 74 at 111G. 
default13.
default  T
defaulthe proposed exceptions to application of the residence test are very narrow, and leave many obvious injustices and lacunae.   
default14.  
defaultContrary to some media reports, 
default 
defaultno 
default general exception 
defaultis proposed 
defaultfor 
default'vulnerable persons' or cases concerned with liberty
default.
default 
default  
defaultThus:
default* 
defaultAsylum seekers are included 
default 
defaultbut only while they are seeking asylu
defaultm
default;
default* Current immigration detainees are included 
defaultbut only while they remain detained, and only in relation to challenging the 
defaultfact of their detention
default.   Challenges to mistreatment in detention or discrimination in detention are therefore excluded.  'Tanja', whose case concerning sexual assaults by Serco officers at Yarl's Wood immigration removal centre was recently reported  in 
defaultthe 
defaultObserver
default 
defaultnewspaper
default  would not be eligible for legal aid in relation to such complaints.
default* Those who can show reasonable grounds that they are trafficking victims are included 
defaultbut only in rela
defaulttion to immigration claims, some 
defaultemployment claims and 
defaultdamages claims against the alleged trafficker
default.  In relation to any other advice or challenge (eg concerning eligibility for welfare benefits
default, community care
default or mental health support) 
defaultsuch a person 
defaultwould be out of scope.
default* Victims of domestic violence are i
defaultncluded 
defaultbut 
defaultagain only in relation to limited categories of claims
default.
default15.   Those who will be excluded from eligibility for legal aid (and hence access to justice) by the residence test include:
default* those who have suffered serious abuse of power by UK state ag
defaultents but who reside abroad (for example
default Baha Mousa'
defaults family, a person extraordinarily rendered to Guantanamo Bay
default);
default* children who have resided in the United Kingdom for most or all of their lives, and
default who would be eligible for formal leave to remain, but
default w
defaulthose parent
defaults
default 
defaulthave
default failed to regularise their immigration status
default.
default* children without parental support who cannot provide evidence of twelve months' lawful residence.
default*  disabled people and mentally ill people who cannot provide proof of twelve months' lawf
defaultul residence will be unable to access even emergency help.
default16.   There will 
defaultthus 
defaultbe categories of people who
default, irrespective of the extent of their needs or the merits of their case 
default are effectively outside the reach of the rule of law.
default   These people are di
defaultsproportionately likely to be female, or children, or disabled.  Yet the equality consequences of these proposals do not appear to have been considered adequately or at all.  T
defaulthey are likely to breach article
default 15 of the UN Convention on the Elimination o
defaultf D
defaultiscrimination Against Women and articles 12 and 13 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
default17.  Lest it be suggested that the 'exceptional funding' provisions under s10 LASPO provide an adequate safety net, it is clear that the exc
defaulteptional funding mechani
defaultsm does not work.   Section 10 LASPO
default provides a theoretical entitlement to assistance if failure to provide it would breach human rights or EU law rights.  However, 
defaultafter six months of the scheme's operation, research showed
default that only 233 applications have been received, and 
defaultof these only six had been granted.   The form is 17 pages long, and there is no funding for solicitors to complete it.  One street homeless man with learning difficulties was refused exceptional funding 
defaultto 
defaulthelp him 
defaultregularise his immigration status so as to enable him to become eligible for community care help
default.
default18.  Nor does it appear that the lacuna could be filled by a public interest body - such as Child Poverty Action Group or Medical Justice - could
default bring a representative claim in relation 
defaultto an area of wider public interest, since the parallel consultation 
defaultJudicial Review: Proposals for Further Reform 
default (06/09/2013) proposes removing standing from such bodies.
default19.  It is unlikely that the 
defaultintroductio
defaultn of a 
defaultresidence test will save money.  In addition to the costs of administering it, 
defaultthere are likely to be significant costs incurred by local authorities dealing with the destitute
default.  T
defaulthe likelihood is that there will be significantly more self-represen
defaultting litigants in the Administrative Court list.  The costs of this - to other litigants, 
defaultto the reputation of the British justice system, in creation of delays, and to the administration of courts - are enormous.    They do 
default not appear to have been factor
defaulted in to the ostensible costs savings.
default   See the observations of Lord Justice Ward in 
defaultWright v Michael Wright Supplies Ltd 
default [2013] EWCA Civ 234 at [2]:
default"What I find so depressing is that the case highlights the difficulties increasingly encountered by the 
defaultjudiciary at all levels when dealing with litigants in person. Two problems in particular are revealed. The first is how to bring order to the chaos which litigants in person invariably – and wholly understandably – manage to create in putting forward thei
defaultr claims and defences. Judges should not have to micro-manage cases, coaxing and cajoling the parties to focus on the issues that need to be resolved. Judge Thornton did a brilliant job in that regard yet, as this case shows, that can be disproportionately
default time-consuming. It may be saving the Legal Services Commission which no longer offers legal aid for this kind of litigation but saving expenditure in one public department in this instance simply increases it in the courts. The expense of three judges of 
defaultthe Court of Appeal dealing with this kind of appeal is enormous. The consequences by way of delay of other appeals which need to be heard are unquantifiable. The appeal would certainly never have occurred if the litigants had been represented. With more a
defaultnd more self-represented litigants, this problem is not going to go away. We may have to accept that we live in austere times, but as I come to the end of eighteen years service in this court, I shall not refrain from expressing my conviction that justice 
defaultwill be ill served indeed by this emasculation of legal aid.
default"
default&#xa0;
defaultPRISONERSdefault20.  
defaultThe MOJ proposes removing  legal aid for a very wide variety of cases arising in prisons (even if internal complaints mechanisms/ombudsmen have not resolved them, even if the complaints are constitutionally important ones).  
defaultThe proposals for removing civi
defaultl legal aid for prisoners 
defaulthave 
defaultnot materially altered, save that the requirement to have a criminal legal aid contract for prison work has been removed.  
default21.   
defaultPrisoners
default 
defaultin the complete control of the state.  
defaultWithout legal aid, they are probably unable to
default obtain independent scrutiny of complaints against it.  
defaultRemoving 
defaultlegal aid to enable them to challenge state action, where other means of redress have failed, is 
defaulttherefore antithetical to the rule of law.  The suggestion that prisoners should use alternati
defaultve means of resolving grievances such as internal complaints and the Prisons and Probation Ombudsman does not obviate this concern, since judicial review has always been a 
defaultremedy of 
defaultlast resort, but 
defaultone which 
defaultsometimes 
defaultproves
default necessary. 
default22.   Removing access to a lawyer in many cases 
default means
default in effect
default removal of access t
defaulto justice in the case of 
defaulta person who is incarcerated
default.
default However, it is doubtful that the small, specialist 
defaultprison law 
defaultfirms 
defaultwill be able to absorb 17.5% cuts in fees and the
default reduc
defaulttion in the scope of 
defaultprison law eligible for legal aid, especially given the ongoing proposal that much initial preparation work for judicial review remain unpaid or subject only to discretionary payment.
default22.  Removal of legal aid for prison work mea
defaultn that there will be many important issues where injustice may go unredressed.  For example:
default- miscategorisation of a prisoners
default in too high a security category
default;
default- unlawful denial of access to offending behaviour courses and/or re-settlement work for releas
defaulte on parole;
default- representations on whether a mother should be separated from her baby or admitted to a mother and baby unit;
default- representations on assaults in prison.
default23.  Apart from individual injustices going unredressed, it is likely that withdrawal of in
defaultdependent advice and assistance will render safe management of prisons more 
defaulte very significant. 
defaultdifficult.  (Lord Woolf's report in 1990 into the Strangeways pris
defaulton disturbances shows a link). 
default24.  Work by Dr Nick Armstrong demonstrates that the on-costs 
defaultof the proposed removal of prison legal aid - mainly as  result of prisoners being categorised in too high a security category and an increased number of complaints to the Prisons &amp; Probation Ombudsman.  
default&#xa0;
defaultJUDICIAL REVIEWdefault25.  The consultation response pro
defaultposes of a 17.5% fee cut and 
default 
defaultno payment for claimant lawyers for work undertaken unless and until permission to proceed by way of judicial review is granted by a court
default.  That is so 
defaulteven if the claim was well-founded but judicial aid is no longer needed, f
defaultor example, because the executive body backs down before the c
defaultlaim is determined by the court
default.
default   In combination with other changes above, and the proposals in the parallel judicial review consultation (eg on standing), these proposals are likely to drive s
defaultmall, specialist, 
defaultefficient firms out of business
default.
default26.  The c
defaultumulative
default practical effect - if not the intention - will be to remove a vital constitutional safeguard against misuse of executive power.
default  It is of particular concern, however, that it 
defaultdoes 
defaultappear to be the intention of the Ministry of Justice to prevent even well-founded applications for judicial review from proceeding, both by limiting legal aid  for judicial review, and by other restrictions on legal aid, including - as noted above - by re
defaultmoving standing for 
defaultpublic interest litigants such as charities and NGOs.
default&#xa0;
defaultBORDERLINE/TEST CASESdefault27.  Equality of arms is important in all litigation, but especially in litigation between an individual and the state.    The proposal to remove legal aid fun
defaultding from 'borderline' cases affects those in which a lawyer cannot fairly estimate the prospects of success: that is, test cases which establish important points of law of general public importance.   The examples given in the paper from Richard Drabble Q
defaultC - which I have seen - illustrate how removal of funding for such cases would enable the government to be the sole judge of when a 'test' case can be brought to challenge a judgment which it considers wrong, in circumstances where individual litigants cou
defaultld not obtain funding to oppose them.   
defaultEXAMPLES OF defaultCONSTITUTIONALLY SIGNIFICANT defaultCAdefaultSES defaultWHICH COULD NOT HAVdefaultE PROCEEDED WITHOUT LEGAL AID  AND WHICH WOULD FALL OUTSIDE THE SCOPE OF LEGAL AID UNDER PRESENT PROPOSALSdefaultR v Secretary of State for the Home Departdefaultment ex parte Simmsdefault default [2000] 2 AC 115 House of Lords
defaultPrison service policy and instructions preventing prisoners' oral interviews with journalists (even on questions of whether wrongly convicted) were held by the House of Lords to be unlawful. 
default(Would 
defaultbe ou
defaultt of scope because would 
defaultfall within prison complaints  exclusion
default plus loss of expertise
default)
defaultR v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte Dalydefault 
default[2001] UKHL 26, [2001] 2 AC 532 HL
defaultThe Home Secretary's blanket policy of searching legal correspondence 
defaultin prison cells in the prisoner's absence was an unjustified infringement of the right to legal professional privilege.
default(Would fall within prison complaints exclusion
default plus loss of prison expertise
default)
defaultR(Anufrijeva) v Secretary of State for the Home Departmentdefault 
default[2003] UKHL 36, [2004] 1 AC 604 House of Lords
defaultWhether a benefit decision triggering removal of benefits could be regarded as final (affecting a large number of claimants).  Court of Appeal in 
defaultR(Anufriejeva) v Southwark London Borough Council 
defaultfound against claimant; Secretary of State took over running defence on appeal because of 
defaultnational 
defaultimportance.  House of Lords 4:1 in her favour.
default(Clarified law in a way important for claimants, but would not attract legal aid funding under present proposa
defaultls, because given legal uncertainty, would have had to have been regarded as borderline. Contrast 
defaultR(Edison) v Secretary of State 
default [2003] UKHL 20, [2003] 2 EGLR 133, Court of Appeal found 2:1 for the 
defaultexecutive
default; House of Lords 3:2 for the executive.  Equally
default a borderline or "test" case, but the executive could appeal it.)
defaultR(Al-Sweady) v Secretary of State for Home Departmentdefault 
default[2009] EWHC 1689 (Admin) [2010] HRLR 12, Divisional Court
defaultIdentifying serious failures within Ministry of Defence in procedure for grant
defaulting public interest immunity certificates
default.
default(Would be out of scope because claimant not resident in jurisdiction).
defaultR(Mousa) v Secretary of State for Defencedefault 
default 
default[2011] EWCA Civ 1334, [2012] HRLR 210
defaultCourt of Appeal ruled on 
defaultthe 
defaultrequirements of an independent 
defaultinvestigation into alleged British military abuses o
defaultf detainees in Iraq.  This resulted in the public enquiry into the circumstances surrounding the death of  Baha Mousa
default.
default(Would be out of scope because victims would fail residence test).
defaultSecretary of Statedefault for the Home Department v Rahmatullahdefault 
default [2012] UKSC 48, [2012] 3 WLR 1087 Supreme Court
defaultUK government to seek return of Pakistani national detained by US in Afghanistan following capture by UK forces in Iraq.  View on ambit of United Kingdom power.
default(Claima
defaultnts would fail residence test)
defaultR(Kaur &amp; Shah) v London Borough of Ealing default[2008] EWHC 2062 (Admin)
defaultVictims of domestic violence successfully challenging decision to remove funding from a specialist refuge.   
default(Claimants 
defaultlikely to be 
defaultunable to 
defaultprove
default that the
defaulty satisfied the residence test, and equality challenge to service provision decision would fall outside ambit of excepted matters for domestic violence victims).
defaultCONCLUSIONdefault2
default8
default.  The proposals in respect of
default civil legal aid 
defaultfunding are of genuine 
defaultconstitutional importance and should be rejected on constitutional
default, human rights and democratic
default grounds.
default2
default9
default.  
defaultNo executive body
default likes to have its decisions overturned in court (any more than it likes them to be criticised in the press).   But no citizen wa
defaultnts to live in a country where the government regards itself as 
defaultab
defaultove and unconstrained by 
defaultlaw.  A
default credible and effective  judicial mechanism for ensuring that the executive acts within its lawful authority is essential to the rule of law.  As Lord Pannick
default QC 
defaulthas recently remarked
default,
default 
default those countries in which the Government win
defaults
default all 
defaultits
default cases in court are not places in which any of us would wish to live
default.
default&#xa0;
default25 September 2013
default I am a QC in private practice specialising in administrative and constitutional law.   I was called to the Bar in 1991 and took silk in 2010.   Before taking silk I was on the Treasury A Panel.   I have appeared both for and against the executive  in high
defaultest courts of England and
default Wales, the CJEU and the ECtHR
default.  
default For example, I represented the Lord Chancellor in  
defaultWilkinson v Kitzinger (Lord Chancellor &amp; Attorney General Intervening) 
default 
default[2006] EWHC 2002 Fam 
defaulton the constitutionality of the Civil Partnerships 
defaultAct 2005.   I sit as a civil recorde
defaultr and a Deputy High Court judge in the Administrative Court.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultAirey v Ireland 
default (1979) 2 EHRR 305; BVerfGE 9, 124 (134f) (German Constitutional Court, 1959).
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultSee concerns expressed in letter to Daily Telegraph, 29 Ma
defaulty 2013 by 90 constitutional law Q
defaultCs
default: http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/letters/10084925/proposals-to-limit-legal-aid-for-judicial-review-will-undermine-the-rule-of-law; open letter from 145 Treasury Counsel to the Attorney General, link at www.matrixlaw.c
defaulto.uk/news; 
default&#xa0;
default see Secretary of State for Justice remarks to the Justice Select Committee on 3 July 2013, and his article in the Daily Mail, 6 September 2013: 
defaulthttp://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2413460/Justice-Secretary-Chris-Grayling-Ill-stop-activis
defaultts-playing-legal-games.html
default.
default&#xa0;
default The vast majority of the panels of Treasury Counsel who represent central government in judicial reviews wrote an open letter to the Attorney General expressing their opposition to the changes on constitutional grounds and o
defaultn the basis that this would lead to inequality of arms.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultNote that 
defaultalthough 
defaultthese observations were made in relation to the original proposals, but the current proposals - as described below - have not changed in substance, and there is no reason to beli
defaulteve that the features which generated the concerns expressed below have been removed.
defaulthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201314/ldhansr
defaultd/text/130711-0002.htm#13071154000666
default &lt;
defaulthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201314/ldhansrd/text/130711-0002.htm#13071154000666
default&gt;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaults
defaultee paragraph 125 of Annex B to 
defaultTransforming Legal Aid: next steps
default, read with Schedule 1 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012, though cf the erroneous impression given by paragraph 2.14 of 
defaultTransforming Legal Aid: next steps.
default http://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/sep/14/yarls-wood-immigrant-sex-abuse-tanja
default 
defaultThis frequently happens - including in the case of looked after children whose statutory parent is the local authority
default.  S
defaultee 
defaultKebede v Newcastle City Council 
default [2013] EWC
defaultA Civ 960 - there was a gap in a claimant's period of lawful residence, and he did not have indefinite leave to remain despite circumstances which generated an entitlement to it, because no application had been made for  this on his behalf by the local aut
defaulthority.
default Marther Spurrier, Public Law Project: 
defaulthttp://legalaidchanges.wordpress.com/2013/07/08/martha-spurrier-exceptional-funding-does-not-protect-access-to-justice.
default 
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/sep/23/legal-aid-residence-test-cost
default 19 May 2011
default, Hansard Vol 727 No 154 col 1503:  http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201011/ldhansrd/text/110519-0001.htm#11051953000793
default