&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by South Yorkshire Refugee Law and Justice (LAI 0026)default&#xa0;defaultSouth 
defaultYorkshire Refugee Law and Justice is a small voluntary organisation which assists refused asylum seekers to obtain fresh evidence and to progress their claim for asylum or human rights protection. This is usually where they have a basis to make further sub
defaultmissions for a fresh claim, and occasionally where they are appealing to the Tribunal. Our first course of action for all our clients is to enable them to obtain new legal representation wherever possible.
default&#xa0;
defaultSouth Yorkshire Migration and Asylum Action Group
default is a broad-based group of many nationalities and political viewpoints acting together for asylum and migrant rights. SYMAAG campaigns for action by Government and others to improve the position of asylum seekers (particularly those who have been refused) 
defaultand exploited migrant workers (including the victims of trafficking).
default&#xa0;
defaultASSIST is a 
defaultSheffield 
defaultcharity which supports destitute refused asylum seekers
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur 
defaultjoint 
defaultresponse to this consultation is confined to those questions which relate directly or indirect
defaultly to our work, and which are within our knowledge. We are aware that our clients may be affected in other ways beyond the scope of our response.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultWe profoundly disagree with the proposal to limit legal aid to those with a ‘strong connection’ with the UK
default, firstly on principle
default. It is a fundamental tenet of the rule of law that all are equal before the law. Th
defaulte legal aid system does not create new causes of action where none exist. It enables access to a court to those who otherwise would not have the means to enforce their rights. It is a means to obtain the legal protection which an affluent person in the sam
defaulte situation would be able to obtain. If the law does not provide a means to take action, then there is nothing for legal aid to fund. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAccess to the UK courts is already restricted by rules of jurisdiction to people who are connected with the UK. A purely foreign issue cannot be transferred to the UK courts on the whim of a litigant. The requirement for a ‘strong connection’ to qualify fo
defaultr legal aid does not affect the jurisdiction of the courts, it only prevents poorer people from accessing the rights which others have. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultgovernment’s 
defaultconsultation document 
defaultwhich launched these proposals 
defaultsays that people can sue in the English courts i
defaultf they have never set foot in the UK. However, this is only the case if the body which they say has wronged them is based in the UK. Ground-breaking and critical human rights cases have been of this kind – for instance the case brought by the family of Bah
defaulta Mousa, which established that he was wrongfully killed by British forces in Iraq. Stopping legal aid in situations of this kind will effectively restore immunity for serious abuses. This case makes it clear that it is not necessary for a legally aided cl
defaultaimant to have a connection with the UK for the case to be a British matter. Perhaps it also makes clear that litigants do not always choose their situation, and litigation is not a luxury. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is not only such extreme
default situations that require a remedy. 
defaultIt
default is entirely inappropriate to require a 
default‘strong connection’ in any public law case unless it is accepted that an act or omission of government creates that strong connection. Where the state makes mistakes which radically affect the life of an individual o
defaultr, worse, subjects that individual to abuse of power, the person needs a remedy and it is unconscionable to suggest that their need for a remedy is rela
defaultted to their residential status. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is a fundamental article of the European Convention on Human Right
defaults that the rights contained in it extend to everyone within the jurisdiction of the contracting states (Article 1). 
defaultThis was debated at the time of the drafting of the ECHR. 
defaultContracting parties considered whether to 
defaultimpose a
default test 
defaultof lawful residence 
defaultand de
defaultcided against it
default. They did so because h
defaultuman rights are fundamentally undermined if they are available to some and not all. The UK’s Human Rights Act replicates this approach. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTo restrict access on the basis of residence is to turn back the clock to 1945, before nations talked together about how to avoid repetition of the atrocities that had just ended, and risks violation of Article 14 of the Convention by discriminating in the
default delivery of rights.   
default&#xa0;
defaultWhile we oppose in principle the requirement for a ‘strong connection’, 
defaultwe also consider that the suggested means for e
defaults
defaulttablishing it are misconceived. 
defaultA ‘strong connection’ is not established by lawful residence but by actual resi
defaultdence. 
defaultLawful residence is a technical concept which in no way governs 
defaultwhether a person’s rights are breached. 
defaultFor instance, t
defaulthe child of a refused asylum seeker
default may not be lawfully resident, nevertheless she may never have 
defaultknown any other home
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are 
defaultvery pleased that the government has agreed to restore eligibility for legal aid to refused asylum seekers to pursue a fresh c
defaultlaim and challenge its refusal. This was vital, given the fundamental problems that still remain in the asylum decision-making pro
defaultcess. We are also very pleased that 
defaulteligibility 
defaulthas been restored 
defaultfor 
defaultvictims of trafficking
default, domestic violence
default and for
defaultced marriages, and for
default children in protection cases. However, children faced with homelessness will not be exempted from the residence te
defaultst. 
defaultIn this and other areas of the proposals, particularly those relating to judicial review, we suggest that the fact that the proposals as developed are subject to an ever-increasing 
defaultlist of exceptions 
defaultillustrates the point that the reforms are not worka
defaultble and risk the safety of vulnerable people. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition to the list of exceptions the 
defaultgovernment 
defaultresponse suggests that people will be able to apply for exceptional funding. 
defaultWe believe that whether this is in fact the case is not substantiated. Under 
defaultthe Legal Aid Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 s.10, exceptional funding may only be applied for whether the case is not within the scope of legal aid. 
defaultWhere a person does not meet the residence criteria their case will still be in scope and
default thus not eligible for exceptional funding. 
defaultThe resulting scheme would be massively complex, even more so than the current legal 
defaultaid scheme, which is already taxing and difficult to understand. A system of exceptions and applications for exceptional fundin
defaultg which may be applied for in some cases but not others will result in eligibility for legal aid becoming an obscure matter
default, 
defaultand 
defaultnot publicly accessible
default. 
defaultThis is turn is likely to generate mistakes and poor practice.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn relation to non-asylum matters, the
default imposition of a te
defaultst of lawful residence creates a new minefield for solicitors and their clients. Immigration 
defaultand nationality 
defaultlaw is highly technical 
defaultand the vast majority of practising solicitors have never learned anything about it, and have no-one in 
defaulttheir firm who can advise on such issues. 
defaultRegardless of this, they will be required to assess whether their client has lawful residence before granting legal aid. 
defaultIn immigration law there will be many common situations in which a solicitor may not know 
defaultwhe
defaultther the client is lawfully resident
default, or
default even whether they are British
default. For instance, what of the international student who is studying and progressing in their studies
default, but who has worked
default more 
defaulthours 
defaultthan they are permitted to do? What of a spouse whose ap
defaultplication for further leave to remain has just been refused? 
defaultAn EEA national who has been made redundant? 
defaultThe holder of a BOC passport? 
defaultEven in relation to asylum seekers
default where the explicit exception is made
default, we think that for the non-specialist, the diffe
defaultrence between an asylum seeker awaiting a tribunal hearing and one who is 
defaulthoping to assemble
default evidence for a fresh claim may not be 
defaulteasily understood.
default&#xa0;
defaultConsequently t
defaulthe potential for people’s immigration status to be wrongly assessed is enormous. Indeed we 
defaultexpect that non-immigration solicitors will be reluctant to engage in this assessment. 
defaultThus we are concerned that asylum seekers and refugees may both be refused legal aid 
defaultfor essential proceedings in for 
defaultinstance family
default or housing matters, 
defaultsimply because the solicitor is not able to assess their status, or chooses not to take clients where 
defaultthis may be an issue. 
defaultRegulations and guidance will be provided, 
defaultbut th
defaulte
defaults
defaulte
default 
defaultare
default un
defaultlikely to be comprehensive. Assessing lawful residence
default will be another fi
defaulteld for 
defaultexceptions and mistakes, b
defaultut the individual will have no means to compel a challenge to a solicitor who 
defaultmakes a wrong
default ass
defaultessm
defaultent. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are concerned about the message which the government gives by 
defaultproposing the 
defaultcriterion of a ‘strong connection’ wi
defaultth the UK in order to receive legal aid. 
defaultAs community organisation
defaults
default we are
default aware of the increase in tensions
default around immigration and asylum. 
defaultFollowing the murder of d
defaultrummer Lee Rigby there wa
defaults an upsurge in divisive narratives
default. 
defaultThe government has a critical
default role t
defaulto play
default in
default the policies which it sets out
default. The recent cuts in welfare benefits
default are one of the most potent 
defaultfactors
default escalating 
defaultanti-immigrant feeling
default. 
defaultWhere the government underscores this division by 
defaultpromoting the idea that there is
default a ‘strong connecti
defaulton’ 
defaultwith this country which can be measured in the way suggested and which should function as a criterion of obtaining access to justice, 
defaultthe government itself risks 
defaultendorsing and 
defaultescalating
default these dangerou
defaults divisions in our society.
default 
defaultWe urge the government 
defaultto take note of the danger of pursuing 
defaultthis path at a time of hardship
default for many people in this country.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe proposal also obscures the fact that legal aid is already subject to a test on the basis of the merits of the case and the means of the applicant. 
defaultThese are proper criteria for
default public funding. Unmeritorious cases are not funded
default. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2) The proposal that providers of legal services in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid for work done on the case if the Court defaultgrants permission for the application to proceeddefault&#xa0;
defaultThis proposal both as originally put and as now amended is very complex in its implications. 
defaultThe complexity itself i
defaults an obstacle to efficient litig
defaultation and fairness. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur understanding from legal practit
defaultioners is that very often it is the pre-action steps in ju
defaultdicial 
defaultreview which are effective, in that the Home Office will often then concede the case, 
defaultor 
defaultretract the decision.
default 
defaultThese pre-action steps will still be legally aidable, but part of what makes the
defaultm effective is the anticipation that judicial review proceedings will follow if no settlement is achieved. 
defaultWhat the proposed changes will do is heighten the risk for practitioners of issuing judicial review proceedings, no doubt increasing their caution in
default issuing proceedings. 
defaultThe chances of success in a public law action are hard to predict, and there is scope for more than one reputable view of the likely outcome of an application. The proposal introduces a costs mechanism which will infl
defaultuence the conduct
default of
default litigation 
defaultin a situation where the applicant has no alternative remedy 
defaultto protect life and limb. 
defaultAs set out above, a
default person subjected to a government mistake, abuse or omission
default cannot choose some alternative path such as mediation, as suggested in the
default consultation document. Public law matters are not susceptible to these alternatives. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFigures for the outcome o
defaultf judicial review applications 
defaultdo not factor in 
defaultthose cases where 
defaultthe less expensive 
defaultpre-action steps
default, backed up by the real threat of judicial review, 
defaulthave
default succeeded
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe suggest that the most effective and just way to reduce public spending on legal aid on asylum and immigration matters is to improve the quality of Home Office handling of applications, 
defaultthereby re
defaultducing the need for court time or pre-action steps.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are aware of the very tight constraints on legal aid firms locally who do immigration and asylum work. 
defaultIt is already 
defaultoften 
defaultdifficult to find a representative who 
defaultcan act quickly and effectively. 
defaultWe
default would be very concerned if solicitors
default were made to should
defaulter the costs of preparing an application for
default judicial review. Our fear is that asylum seekers and refugees would find it extremely difficult to get any represent
defaultat
defaultion
default in what are sometimes the most critical situations 
default(e.g. when f
defaultaced with detention or removal).
default&#xa0;
defaultThe proposal 
defaultmight encourage a kind of brinkmanship in the government side, and settling the case (i.e. withdrawing a possibly life-threatening decision su
defaultch as to remove someone from the UK) 
defaultmay become less a matter of finding an effective way to see justice done, and more
default a
default 
defaultgambl
defaulte
default on the applicant’s solicitor being unwilling to bear the risk of 
default(further) 
defaultcosts by going to court. 
defaultIt is obvious that this is 
defaultnot a way to ensu
defaultre justice or access to a court, especially where people are vulnerable to 
defaultlife-threatening effects of 
defaultstate action. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3)The proposal that legal aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success.default&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaultis proposal ignores the unpredictable nature of public law and the very high stakes for the client. 
defaultAs with the previous points, these proposals miss the 
defaultissues that are at stake in asylum cases. 
defaultIt c
defaultannot be right 
defaultfor the UK
default, as a signatory to the R
defaultefugee Convention, 
defaultto deny a hearing 
defaultwhere 
defaultan asylum seeker’s challenge to removal or t
defaulthe refusal of their claim is
default slightly more likely to succeed than fail.
default The standard of proof in refugee cases is ‘a reasonable degree of likelihood’ that the feared ris
defaultk will materialise. As Sedley LJ said
default, 
defaultcomparing the refugee claim to a faulty type of car, even if only one car in ten actually crashes, most people would think there was a real risk of travelling
default in such a car. I
defaultf they had a choice they would
default not do it.
default When the risk is of death or serious injury, a borderline case is one that must be heard. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn our experience, 
defaultasylum 
defaultcases assessed as borderline may be those where successive errors and omissions have eroded and obscured the merits of the case
default, but wher
defaulte significant issues remain to be properly determined. An assessment as borderline may be
default the wisest course for a legal aid practitioner who is not able to really delve into the history of the matter or test out perhaps contentious legal points until they have the funding to do so. 
defaultWhere the law is unclear, disputed or needs to be tested, a le
defaultgal aid practitioner may not in conscience be able to assess the merits as more than borderline, but it is precisely these cases which need the protection of publicly funded advice and representation.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are very concerned that the people who have alread
defaulty had the worst experience of justice and fairness within the system will, if this rule is imposed, be the very ones who will suffer again and be effectively excluded from protection. Again we would stress, asylum cases are often about life and death issue
defaults. Access to a court is not a luxury. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe strength of the case is only one dimension of assessing its importance and whether the public purse should fund it. 
defaultThe importance of the matter at stake should also be a criterion, and where breaches of fundamen
defaulttal rights are in issue, as they are in asylum
default cases, 
defaultthe threshold 
defaultshould be a low one. This is to protect the individual and 
defaultto 
defaultoffer scrutiny to 
defaultprotect 
defaultthe public authority 
defaultfrom a
default breach 
defaultof 
defaultits international obligations.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default5
defaultSouth Yorkshire Refugee Law and Justice 
defaultCharity No: 1146748
default 
default 
defaultN201200046default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultECHR Travaux-ART1-COUR(77)9 p
defaultp
default.34
default and 49
default, Report of the Sub-Committee instructed to 
defaultmake a preliminary study of the amendments proposed by the members of the Committee of Experts (5 February 1950) (1)
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultBatayav v SSHD 
default[2003] EWCA Civ 1489 
default