SummarydefaultThe 
defaultimpact
default on vulnerable groups is the main focus of this submission.  
defaultIt is encouraging that the 
defaultSecretary of State has indicated after the consultation period that some of these impacts will be mitigated, but not all.  The residence test as proposed disadvantages both asylum seekers given status, and those who have exhausted appeal rights but wish to
default make a fresh claim, as well as people held in prisons and detention centres.
defaultThe impact on 
defaultprisoners
default has been dealt with in 
defaultsweeping
default and dismissive terms by the 
defaultSecretary
default of State.  The issues go 
defaultmuch
default deeper than he 
defaultacknowledges
default, 
defaultespecially for
default 
defaultthose
default with
default disabilities, and those whose path to 
defaultrelease
default lies through tricky areas of risk 
defaultreduction
default, and those subject to disciplinary and solitary confinement procedures.
default The weakest part of the Ministry of Justice response to the consultation is in this area: it 
defaultrelies on promises from NOMS that clear guidance (not covering all the issues raised here) which has not been consistently followed up to now, will be followed in future.
defaultThe proposals on payment for work in preparation for judicial review, and for cases w
defaulthose merits are on the 
defaultborderline
default, are blunt instruments which would make the legal 
defaultsystem
default less 
defaultflexible
default and
default less
default responsive to changing circumsta
defaultnces.
default……………………………….
defaultThe consultation paper proposes a blanket 12-month residence test.  
defaultThis
default creates some anomalies, firstly in respect of four groups which contain some vulnerable people who, in natural justice, me
defaultrit some legal aid support, and secondly in respect of two spec
defaultific groups of victims of crime.  It is encouraging to note that the Secretary of State has indicated some movement on some of these issues, but it is worth spelling them out in full:
defaultA. Four g
defaultroups in particular would find their access to legal aid restricted under these proposals:
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAsylum seekers who are granted status will not be able to access legal aid until 12 months after the date of grant (unless they had legal aid as asylum-seekers and a
defaultre still receiving it at the date of grant).  This appears to contravene Article 16 of the Refugee Convention –
default16.2  A refugee shall enjoy in the Contracting State in which he has his habitual residence the same treatment as a national in matters 
defaultpertaining to access to the courts, including legal assistance
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAn asylum seeker whose appeal rights are exhausted will not be able to access legal aid to make a fresh claim – although once they have made a fresh claim, they will 
defaultagain have the exemption fo
defaultr asylum-seekers.  This is a Catch-22, since the great majority will need legal advice in order to make a fresh claim at all, especially if they have vulnerabilities additional to those inherent in their position as migrants. People in this group will not 
defaultbe able to obtain legal assistance on any issues connected with support and accommodation, even if they are destitute.  Nor will anyone without status be able to obtain legal assistance in challenging removal on the basis of Article 8 rights to private and
default family life.
default3)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThose held in immigration detention under administrative powers will almost always not meet the residence test.  This will hinder them, for example, in bringing legal challenge against their continued detention.
default4)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultMany foreign national prisoner
defaults are also likely to be ineligible for legal aid under this provision – including those who are mentally ill.
default&#xa0;
defaultB.  The consequences are especially serious for the two groups who were specifically guaranteed access to legal aid in LASPO 2012, in relation to
default compensation claims and to their immigration status:  victims of 
defaulthuman 
defaulttrafficking, and those who have come to this country with a partner whose relationship then breaks down because they are victims of domestic violence.  In relation to trafficking victi
defaultms, the relevant European Directive commits HMG to:
default“
defaultensure that victims of trafficking in human beings have access without delay to legal counselling, and, in accordance with the role of victims in the relevant justice
default system, to legal representation, including for the purpose of claiming compensation. Legal counselling and legal representation shall be free of charge where the victim does not have sufficient financial resources
defaultThe provisions in LASPO 2012 should be ma
defaultintained, as does not appear to be the case (save where there is an exceptional case determination) in the current proposals, until and unless the victim has been lawfully resident for 12 months.
default……………………………….
defaultA.default default The equality implicationsdefault of the proposals need further examination.  The main text of the paper says  ‘We have had due regard to the impact of these proposals on those sharing protected characteristics, including those with
default learning difficulties and/or mental health issues’, referring to Annex B.  The relevant part of Annex B reads:
defaultThe current prisoners’ complaints system was introduced in April 2012 and is set out in PSI 02/2012. The existing formal complaints process is p
defaultredicated on a paper-based system. However, the policy documentation makes clear that governors must have arrangements in place that will allow a prisoner to make a formal complaint orally to a member of staff where the prisoner has difficulty doing so in 
defaultwriting. Often prisoners who have difficulty expressing their complaint in writing and who prefer not to make an oral complaint will seek the help of a fellow prisoner such as a Listener to assist with the process.
defaultThese provisions are indeed contained in 
defaultPrison Service Instruction 02/12.  It is welcome that foreign national prisoners may write their complaints in their own language. However, the following problems arise:
defaultGiven that these are the current arrangements in prisons, it is reasonable to expect that those who, especially through disability, are not able to formulate or write down their o
defaultwn complaints should have access to legal aid to make a complaint, inclu
defaultd
defaulting complaints about treatment.
defaultB.  defaultSegregationdefault. Where a prisoner is removed from association under Prison Rule 45 (segregation for good order or discipline) or under Rule 46 (close s
defaultupervision centre), they will not have recourse to legal aid under the current proposals.  These are severe restrictions, amounting in most cases to solitary confinement.  It seems harsh to remove access to legal aid in this context, especially for that si
defaultgnificant proportion of segregated prisoners who have significant vulnerabilities and very little support from family or peers.
defaultC. default Adjudications.default The paper proposes that ‘disciplinary cases which did not engage the Tarrant criteria, which were not referre
defaultd to an independent adjudicator and which did not involve the determination of a criminal charge and so did not engage the criminal limb of Article 6 ECHR, would no longer be funded’.  To date, the Tarrant criteria have been applied only when deciding whet
defaulther to grant legal representation in person at a disciplinary hearing; that is the basis on which the criteria were established in the Divisional Court in 1983, and they do not include any reference to the prisoner’s ability to understand what is happening
default.  It is the experience of many NOMS adjudicators that those placed on report, especially those who are not experienced in adjudication processes through a consistent pattern of rule-breaking, often do not understand the quasi-legal processes and terms of 
defaultthe adjudication process.  While adjudicating governors are generally conscientious in trying to explain everything to the prisoner, the accused prisoner frequently does not know what the charge formula means or how to plead in response to it.  This applie
defaults still more clearly amid the complexities of charging for positive drug tests.  Access to legal advice over the telephone is not a waste of public funds in such circumstances: at the least, adjudicating governors should have discretion as to whether there
default is a genuine need for access to legal advice in the particular instance, guided perhaps by a more appropriate set of criteria than Tarrant.
defaultD.  default 
defaultRelease on paroledefault.  While an exception is made in the consultation paper for Article 5.4 ECHR (right to have o
defaultn-going detention reviewed), this is likely to relate only to direct challenge to a decision on continuance of detention, normally by the Parole Board.  There are a number of administrative actions within NOMS which will 
defaultsignificantly 
defaultaffect
default 
defaultthe outcome of
default such decision processes
default, especially in the case of indeterminate sentences, and notably post-tariff IPP prisoners.  Some provision for legal aid for IPP prisoners, in respect of matters directly affecting their prospect of release (such as availability of
default offending behaviour programmes, and recategorisation) would be just.
default……………………………….
defaultThis introduces a system analogous to ‘no-win-no-fee’ for applications to the High Court for permission to bring a judicial review. It is evidently designed to restrict judicial reviews to those cases which the lawye
defaultr concerned believes to be almost certain to receive permission. This sets the bar very high, since there will be relatively few cases in which a lawyer is so certain of success as to risk being paid nothing for the work. . While it is fair to place some r
defaultestrictions on legal aid for JR applications, it would be preferable to target those cases where there is no reasonable expectation of success, rather than 
defaultto 
defaultuse the blunt criterion of actual success or failure.  
defaultSo many cases are settled before they go t
defaulto court, on the basis of the work done towards seeking permission, that loss of this avenue may reduce the likelihood of positive and fair outcomes.
default……………………………….
defaultThe small class of borderline cases currently eligible for legal aid includes court orders for possession of the applicant’s home; domestic violence; and public law children cases, as well as a variety of other carefully defined types 
defaultof case with ‘special features’.  The stakes in many such cases are clearly high; and it still seems reasonable that in these cases the benefit of any doubt should be given.  ‘Borderline’ sounds, as presented in the consultation paper, as if it means ‘poor
default in all but name’ – it does not, and the rigorous definitions which are currently enshrined in the regulations should remain.
default  Maters which have ‘borderline’ prospects of success often involve key points of law that need testing, to see whether new facts o
defaultr perspectives may change the courts’ perspective on a particular type of case.
default&#xa0;
default26
default September 2013
default&#xa0;default4
default&#xa0;
default