&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by PlaceShapersdefault1.default              defaultBackgrounddefault1.1
default              
defaultPla
defaultceShapers is a network of over
default 100 community-based housing associations formed in 2008. Between us we own more than 700,000 homes 
defaultand provide 
defaultservices to more than two million people. These include health services, 
defaultsocial care and a range of
default community services. 
default1.2
default              
defaultTogether we complet
defaulted over 40,000 new affordable homes between 2008 and 2012 and we collectively plan to invest around £5bn
default to deliver a further 32,000
default homes by 2015. As an alliance, our views therefore represent those responsible for over a quarter of the sector’s housing stock. Details of our members and more about what we do can be found on our website: 
defaultwww.pla
defaultceshapers.org
default 
default  
default1.3
default              
defaultWe are pleased to provide this submi
defaultssion to assist the
default Committee’s inquiry into the impact of changes in the provision of support to meet housing costs in the reformed welfare system
default. In doing so, we have 
defaultincluded evidence
default from our
default members (some of whom may have made their own submissions to the inquiry) 
defaulton the emerging 
defaulteffects of changes
default implemented
default. We have also drawn on 
defaultfeedback we provided to CLG and DWP staff in January of this year when invited to discuss our concerns about th
defaulte planned reforms.
default2.default              defaultOur submissiondefault2.1
default              
defaultFor the purposes of your Inquiry, we have limited our su
defaultbmission to discussion of 
defaultkey issues of particular importance to us
default,
default each of which we return to below. These are:
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe impact of welfare reform on our communiti
defaultes 
default(
defaultsection 3 below)
default;
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe 
defaulteffect of welfare reform on our 
defaulttenants 
default– experience so far 
default(
defaultsection 4 below)
default; 
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow HAs are supporting people into work
default (
defaultsection 5 below)
default; 
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe impact of welfare reform on HA finances and development capacity
default (
defaultsection 6 below)
default; 
defaultand
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultConcluding comments (section 7 below).
default3. default              defaultThe defaultimpact of welfare reform on our communitiesdefault3.1
default              
defaultIt is clear from the feedback we 
defaulthave received that 
defaultthe impact of welfare reform will be
default variable around the country. This is not a surprise to us and reflects the diversity 
defaultof communities, local economies
default and housing markets. W
defaulthilst we understand that the government will seek 
defaultcomposite headline facts and figures we expect that such data 
defaultmay 
defaultmask the reality of this diversity and would urge continuing attention to the impact at a regional level. 
default3.2
default              
defaultA case in point here is the 
default“spare room subsidy” or
default “bedroom tax”. Whilst all HAs report likely adverse impacts on their communities of the refor
defaultms as a whol
defaulte, the bedroom tax is of huge
default concern to those in the Midlands, the North and in some rural communities where much of the housing stock comprises larger properties and flexible allocation policies have been promoted by partner LAs. Planned unde
defaultr-occupation has facilitated long-term residence as families grow as well as securing acceptance of low demand stock –e.g. in high rise blocks – thus reducing v
defaultoid costs. 
default3.3
default              
defaultThe proportion of 
defaultour members’ 
defaulttenants affected by the bedroom tax ranges from 
default5
default-20%, the higher levels being in the North where many HAs have several thousand under-occupying households. They will not be able to move tenants who want to downsize due to the scarcity of smaller properties and there is the potential for an oversupply of
default 3Bed + vacancies (with a cons
defaultequent impact on void
default costs) if new applicants with a strict 2bed need are unable to accept larger properties for financial reasons. This in turn will increase waiting times for smaller properties with an impact on temporary h
defaultousing costs.
default And where tenants are able to move they may have to move far away from their friends, family and 
defaultsupport networks and also from the schools which their children attend causing great upheaval and isolation.
default3.4
default              
defaultAn e
defaultxample here is a Midlands 
defaultho
defaultusing group with over 600 tenants affected by the bedroom tax and mainly “under-occupying” 
default3 bedroom properties. 
defaultThis HA does not have 
defaultlarge families in overcrowded conditions 
defaultwaiting for 3 bedroom homes and such
default properties have now become much harder to
default l
defaultet because the demand in the area
default is now 
defaultlargely for 2 bedroom homes. An analysis of 3-bedroom 
defaultlettings in July 2013 showed that all were let to those with low needs and in some cases it took more than one bidding cycle to allocate any household to these properties at all. 
default3.5
default              
defaultWhilst changes to specific benefits are of concern, our members are equa
defaultlly worried about the cumulative ef
defaultfect of
default 
defaultreforms on their residents
default an
defaultd the blanket application of
default changes across the country
default. Many 
defaultreforms will happen consecutively with the impact of the bedroom tax, benefits cap and consolidated single UC payment hitt
defaulting people at the same time as they are, for example, 
defaultalso possibly required to pay 
defaultcontribution
defaults
default towards council tax or face losing disability payments. This combination of event
defaults in addition to the 
default1% cap on future benefit uplifts will create significant
default fina
defaultncial pressures on communities. 
defaultGrowing homelessness as debt related evictions increase with visible signs of acute poverty are inevitable.
default4.default              defaultThe defaulteffect of welfare reform on our tenants – experience so fardefault4.1
default              
defaultAcross the country our member HAs
default have p
defaultrepared for welfare reform, assessing the likely impact and developing
default action plans in response. All are in touch with their tenants to develop increasing awareness and 
defaultto offer specialist support. They
default are doing this in a variety of ways including 1:1 con
defaulttacts, road shows, mailshots, social media campaigns, telephone campaigns, targeting those considered to be in the most vulnerable situations and partnerships with their LAs and other agencies to share experi
defaultence and good practice. Some
default are working in part
defaultnership with credit unions to create new jam-jar account facilities and others are taking a lead on efforts to increase digital inclusion. In addition, all of our members are extensively involved 
defaultin worklessness initiatives (see section 5 below
default).
default4.2
default              
defaultTenant awareness and understan
defaultding of welfare reform
default and the imp
defaultlications for them personally remains
default mixed at this stage. The main response of those affected by the bedroom tax appears to be that they will just find ways of paying to stay or will try to o
defaultccupy their homes to the full. 
defaultEven where tenants are prepared to move, the shortage of available smaller properties means 
defaultthat for most 
defaultthis is unlikely 
defaultwithin 
defaultrealistic timescale
defaults
default. A
defaultnother Midlands
default member reports that it would take around six years to ac
defaultcommodate their 800 affected customers in smaller homes if they all wanted to move. 
defaultFurthermore, it is 
defaultalready clear that any savings to be made from tenants moving to smaller homes may
default not materialise. For example, 
defaulta different member
default confirms that of the 
defaultfew tenants they have helped to
default downsize
default, 12 out of 15 of them are now paying higher rent / service charges – an increase to the exchequer of between £2
default 
default-
default 
default£14 per week. 
default4.3
default              
defaultThe impact on those who have disabilities is extreme. 
defaultM
defaultany 
defaultsuch tenants
default live in 
defaultsp
defaultecifically adapted properties and i
defaultt is practically impossi
defaultble to transfer them
default to smaller properties because of the nature of their dis
defaultabilities and resulting
default housing need
default. Our members
default are trying t
defaulto 
defaulthelp 
defaultthese tenants
default stay in their homes, for example by trying to find
default different 
defaultuses for
default ‘spare’ bedrooms
default and maximising 
defaultincomes, but the 
defaultreality is that most 
defaultwill have to find the additional money to cover the housing benefit shortfall
default and will struggle to do so
default.
default4.4
default              
defaultChanges to Council Tax benefit have compounded the impact of the bedroom tax for some and add
defaulted an additional household cost
default for those
default not impacted by 
defaultother changes. Local authorities are now free to determine their own council ta
defaultx benefit scheme but the f
defaultinancial support available 
defaulthas been cut by 10%. This has left councils with difficult choices and the majority have decided that working age 
defaulthouseholds who previously may have had their council tax bills covered in full will have to pay something. 
default4.5
default              
defaultThe
default result is that we are already seeing tenants get into rent arrears with up to 50%
default of those affected now in debt, including those who 
defaulthad previously always had clear accounts
default.
default 
defaultThis situation we believe can only get worse as additional reforms bite and, cru
defaultcially, as those lucky enough to have received Discretionary Housing Pay
defaultments (DHPs) from their LAs find
default this temporary support withdrawn. 
default4.6
default              
defaultOur members have real concerns about the mounting debts 
defaultsuch tenants may accrue and the
default 
defaultimpact on 
defaulttheir families
default, debts that will travel with them through no fault of their own if they do secure a move
default. There is
default 
defaultincreasing evidence of 
defaulttenants being sold 
defaultexorbitantly expensive payday loans and getting into a
defaultn impossible cycle of debt when
default 
defaultunable to repay these
default. 
defaultThe CAB services with whom our members work locally are already reporting huge increases in demand for debt support and not just in 
defaultareas of traditionally high need. F
defaultor example
default, a Surrey 
defaultmember reports that their CAB saw a 41% increase in the total debt o
defaultf those they were helping between 2011/2 and 2012/13 – a jum
defaultp of £2.2m even before the roll-
defaultout of key 
defaultwelfare reforms. 
default4.7
default              
defaultMany tenants may have unrealistic expectations of how they will manage and are already saying they will go without heat and / or fo
defaultod to make ends meet. 2,200 families in Knowsley are already known recipients of foodbank donations
default and increasing use of such services is now being reported all around the country
default.
default 
default4.8
default              
defaultThe government 
defaultlays great emphasis on the availabil
defaultity of DHPs to sup
defaultport
default vulnerable claimants affected
default by welfare reform. Despite this fund being
default increased, our experience 
defaultis that the demand for
default assistance far outstrips the 
defaultavailable payments and 
defaulteven where additional support is approved there is no guarantee that this will be maintained in the long term for residents whose complex needs are unlikely to change. Furthermore, 
defaultmany cases involving severe 
defaulthardship are being turned down.
default4.
default9
default              
defaultOne of our 
defaultSouthern
default members reports that their local council has already spent more on DHP in Q1 than they will be able to budget for in Q2, 3 and 4 and that therefore DHPs will be more difficult to obtain later in the year.
default Other
default LAs appear to be rationing 
defaulta
defaultwards in
default an effort not to use
default the fund too quickly.
default4.10
default              
defaultA case in point is an
default 
defaultEast-
defaultbased 
defaultmember
default 
defaultwho reports
default that 
defaultwhilst their LA is supportive they are declining around half of the DHP applications received. 
defaultAn example includes 
defaulta se
defaultverely disabled tenant 
defaulthit by t
defaulthe underoccupation charge because 
defaulta relative was
default caring for her
default son temporarily whilst 
defaultshe 
defaultrecovered
default from a leg amputation
default and awaited
default the fitting of a prosthetic limb. Her
default DHP application was 
defaultturned down because 
defaultshe had taken out a new Sky subscription
default. T
defaulthe HA helped her appeal this decision on the basis that this supposedly unjus
defaulttified expense provides an
default essential means of communication (including internet grocery shopping) 
defaultbut was
default again unsuccessful. The 
defaulttenant’s mental health has 
defaultdeteriorated as a 
defaultresult of the
defaultse
default stress
defaultful circumstances and she is struggling to cope financially.
default 
defaultThis HA also reports a 25% increase in referrals to the local CAB for specialist debt and money advice.
default4.11
default              
defaultAnother Midlands
default member reports that 
defaultit has 95
default 
defaultof its most vulne
defaultrable tenants currently 
defaulton DHP 
defaultbut that 
defaultonce 
defaulttheir 
defaultDHP 
defaultawards end – most of which will be in the next two months – these tenants
default will be at serious risk of losing their tenancies as there is no ‘additional’ income available to 
defaultcover the shortfall in housin
defaultg support
default.  
default5.default              defaultHow HAs are supporting people into workdefault5.1
default              
defaultAll of our members are involved in worklessness projects. This has been part of the “day job” for some time. Our own research in 2011 confirmed that just 38 of our members had already helped
default 
default10
default,
default00
default0
default young people into
default work. Such support has
default continued with renewed emphasis. 
default5.2
default              
defaultOur members run volunteer schemes to provide valuable work experience, employ apprentices either direc
defaulttly or in partnership with
default contractors, provide recruitment skills training and support, work closely with local schools, colleges, recruitment agencies and Job Centre Plus and support the growth of new social enterprises. 
default5.3
default              
defaultHowever, despite these efforts and the positive result
defaults achieved in some areas, there is continuing concern about the ongoing lack of 
defaultsecure 
defaultjobs or additional hours of work. Our experience is that very rarely is being out of work a lifestyle choice.
default6.default              defaultThe impact of welfare reform on HA finances and developmdefaultent capacitydefault6.1
default              
defaultOur members are concerned about a range of factors that will impact on their finances negatively and could combine to cause strain on revenue streams, borrowing and developme
defaultnt capacity. Whilst it 
defaultis difficult to predict 
defaultthe outcome 
defaultaccura
defaulttely at this stag
defaulte, the HA risk profile has 
defaultchange
defaultd
default significantly from one of organisations with an assumed “safe” income stream to a future picture reflecting increased uncertainty. 
default6.2
default              
defaultConcerns can be summarised as follows:
default6.2.1
default              
defaultAn assumed increase i
defaultn 
defaultrent arrears (which previously 
defaultaverage
defaultd
default 
default2-5%) with a doubling of these
default rates in many cases. Significantly, the assumption is that much of this increase will not be easily recoverable and therefore HAs are increasing their business plan provision for bad de
defaultbts by 1-2%.
default 
defaultFor example, 
defaulta Northern
default member reports that of 644 households affected by the bedroom tax, 41% have not been able to make any payment so far towards the shortfall and only 29% have made the payment in full. If thi
defaults pattern continues the HA 
defaultsta
defaultnd
defaults
default to lose close to £250k in rental income.
default6.2.2
default              
defaultThe concerns around housing costs being included in Universal Credit payments 
defaultrather than being paid directly to landlords 
defaultare well documented. 
defaultWe are particularly worried that under UC job seekers 
defaultwho are subject to sanction will lose all their benefits and risk losing their home 
defaulttoo 
defaultwhereas those being sanctioned currently do not lose Housing Benefit.
default We are also concerned that “vulnerable” people who are not living in specialist accommodation will
default be expected to self-determine their vulnerability in order to have their housing costs paid direct to landlords, a requirement that
default is unlikely to protect 
defaultthose most in need of support.
default6.2.3
default              
defaultIncreased operational costs as HAs take on additional staff (or
default partner with other agencies to do so) to try to mitigate the impact – e.g. welfare advisers, income collection staff and digital inclusion support staff.
default6.2.4
default              
defaultIncreased transactional costs for rent collection as a result of UC being paid in one sum direc
defaultt to tenants. Estimates for the increased cost of collecting payments from every individual tenant in receipt of benefit (rather than receiving bulk payments from LAs) range from £50k-£350k per HA.
default6.2.5
default              
defaultIncreased legal fees for enforcement action with som
defaulte uncertainty as to how courts will cope with and respond to increased repossession claims.
default6.2.6
default              
defaultIncreased void turnaround costs due to difficulty in letting unaffordable larger units, increased evictions and many LAs passing on council tax benefit cuts b
defaulty removing relief on void properties (the impact of which alone was est
defaultimated as £100k pa by one member
default). 
default6.2.7
default              
defaultReal concern that if rent arrears convert into long-term bad debt this will impact adversely on the 
defaultability to comply with 
defaultloan covenants and c
defaultash flow with a consequent impact on the financial health of the sector generally. In this light, housing associations will have little sc
defaultope for leniency regarding 
defaultarrears recovery or enforcing repossession orders with an inevitable impact on homelessness
default rates.
default6.2.8
default              
defaultA
default knock-on effect on development capacity
default resulting from 
defaultpredicted increase
defaults
default in operational costs and reduced revenues
default. 
defaultFeedback from 
defaultmembers 
defaultsuggests this could mean redu
defaultctions of up to 15% in development plans
default, equating
default 
defaultto 
defaultalmost
default 5,000 
defaultnew 
defaulthomes.
default 
defaultLinked to this is a likely 
defaultreduction in the supply of larger properties given concerns that incoming tenants will not be able to cover rent payments.
default6.2.9
default              
defaultThe 
defaultlikely drying up of the 
defaultsupply of privately leased temporary housing for the homeless, particularly in London where owners are likely to look for tenants able to pay more than the housing benefit cap. 
default7default.default              defaultConcluding commentsdefault7.1
default              
defaultIt is clear from the above that housing association
defaults have very real concerns about the 
defaultnegative 
defaultimpact of welfare reform
default on their communities and their own bu
defaultsiness models. Whilst the full
default impact of 
defaultreforms 
defaultis not yet clear and th
defaultis 
defaultis 
defaultlikely to vary by region, our members are making prudent adjustments to
default financial plans in order to mitigate the risks and to maximise the support available to affected tenants. 
default7.2
default              
defaultW
defaulte would 
defaultwelcome any influence that the W&amp;P Select Committee is able 
defaultto 
defaulthave in achieving
default the following:
default7.2.1
default              
defaultRecogn
defaultition that the bedroom tax 
defaultis already having
default a significant adver
defaultse impact and that this is 
defaultparticularly so 
defaultwhere 
defaultthere is not scope for affected househol
defaultds to downsize
default. 
defaultIn the
default absence of 
defaultthis measu
defaultre
default being repealed
default (a decision 
defaultwe would
default support), an obvious solution 
defaultis for there to b
defaulte discretion to waive the tax where lo
defaultcal housing markets justify
default exemption, a move that would surely be consistent with the Government’s 
defaultlocalism 
defaultcommitment
default.
default7.2.2
default              
defaultRecognition that the Local Authority DHP scheme is not protecting the most 
defaultvulnerable resid
defaultents from
default financial hardship and cannot be relied on to do so. 
default7.2.3
default              
defaultContinued g
defaultovernmen
defaultt action to ensure accelerated broadband 
defaultInternet
default access for our communities, within which 40-60% of residents are currently 
defaultdigitally excluded and recognition by D
defaultWP 
defaultthat broadband
default payments do not constitute an unnecessary luxury.
default&#xa0;
default7.2.4
default              
defaultAcknowledgment that HA revenue
default streams are at risk from the
default cha
defaultnges and that this is 
defaultimpact
defaulting
default negatively on financial plans and development capacity. Any influence that 
defaultthe Committee 
defaultcan have to mitigate
default these risks is
default welcomed. I
defaultn particular 
defaultthis should be 
defaultto ensure that the housing element of UC can be paid direct to landlords more quickly and in the longer
default term once arrears are accruing
default.
default T
defaulthe pilot p
defaultrojects show
default that tenants 
defaultget into
default 
defaultunmanageable amounts of debt if housing payments cannot revert to landlords until 8 weeks have elapsed. With
default “affordable” weekly rent
defaults
default in London not uncommon at £250 it seems irresponsible to wait until a tenant has accrued arrears of over £2k before agre
defaulteing that housing costs can again be paid direct to landlords.
default7.2.5
default              
defaultAn ongoing commitment to
default learn lessons from the reforms
default and for policy a
defaultnd practice to be subject to change
default in the light of experience.
default&#xa0;
default27 September 2013default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default