&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Anchor, defaultHanover defaultHousing Associationdefault and Housing 21default&#xa0;default1. defaultSummary Positiondefault for the three providers default1.1 
defaultAnchor, Hanover and 
defaultHousing 21are the largest national specialist providers of older people’s housing. Together we provide a majority of specialist accommodation and services for this client group
default, and lead in the building of extra care housing
default. We have decided to offer a joi
defaultnt response to the Committee in order to demonstrate the level of our shared concerns regarding the way in which support for housing costs is changing as a result of welfare reforms; 
defaultin the hope that this will 
defaultadd 
defaultweight to our comments
default.
default&#xa0;
default1.2 
defaultAnchor defaultis a n
defaultot-for-profit organisation with more than 40 years’ experience of helping older people. We are England’s largest not-for-profit provider of sheltered housing for rent as well as England’s largest not-for-profit care home provider. We provide great places t
defaulto buy or rent as well as care and support services, including:
default&#xa0;
default•
default              
defaultAlmost 700 retirement housing schemes
default•
default              
defaultProperty management services for leaseholders at 230 estates
default•
default              
default97 care homes, including two specialist dementia homes
default•
default              
defaultAlmost 1,000 integrated care a
defaultnd housing properties
default&#xa0;
default1.
default3
default 
defaultHanover Housing Associationdefault is a 
defaultmajor 
defaultnational provider of retirement housing 
defaultand one of the largest providers of Extra Care accommodation. Hanover 
defaultmanages approximately 
default19,000 properties
default 
default(including over 
default30
default00 properties for Extra Care) 
defaultin some 600 lo
defaultcations across England
default.
default 
defaultWe work in over 216 local authority areas. 
defaultApproximately 10% of our stock is occupied by those under minimum state pension credit age, and potentially affected by the present and future ch
defaultanges to support for housing costs.
default&#xa0;
default1.
default4
default 
defaultHousing 21default is a major specialist provide
defaultr
default of older people's housing and services - a leading national social enterprise which promote
defaults
default choice and independence for older people through quality care, health and housin
defaultg services. With nearly 50 years of experience we provide a complete service to meet the diverse needs of older people supporting them to have a good later life.
defaultWe operate in 242 local authority areas, providing individually tailored solutions spanning ho
defaultusing, care, support, dementia and other services. We have 470 retirement/sheltered housing schemes. All told we manage over 20,000 sheltered and extra care properties for older people
default.
default 
default1.
default5
default 
defaultOur
default joint response concentrate
defaults
default upon implications of
default changes
default in respect of Registered 
defaultProviders
default,
default and 
defaultvulnerable claimants – particularly those with disabilities and within supported accommodation
default, not all of which will come within the current definition of exempt accommodation
default. 
defaultWe have also responded on the treatme
defaultnt of housing costs within Universal Credit
default; and made additional observations on future implications for older people.
default&#xa0;
default2. Direct payment of housing costs to claimantsdefault2.1 
defaultWe appreciate the principle of replicating the world of work and encouraging those i
defaultn receipt of benefits to manage their finances in similar fashion to those who are working. 
default&#xa0;default2.2 However we are aware that 
defaultt
defaulthe direct payment demonstration projects are already showing an increase in rent arrears, despite 
defaultorganisations 
defaultincreasing 
defaulttheir 
defaultstaff resources to manage the process. 
defaultThe fear is therefore that l
defaultandlords will not be able to replicate this level of intensive management across their entire stock, with a real concern that arrears levels will increase further.
default The risks are potentially
default greater within a supported housing environment as the incidence of v
defaultulnerable tenants
default will be greater and such tenants may be the 
defaultleast likely to be able to maintain rent payments to their landlord. The Local Support Services Framework sets out extensive 
defaultmeasures to assist those most vulnerable and needing support to cope, but introduces new bureaucracy and processes
default.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 
defaultWe believe that landlords, in consultation with their tenants, should be able to agree how rent is paid to them. Most supported housing
default providers will 
defaultwork to promote the independence of their tenants and will recognise when it is appropriate to have rent paid direct to them, bypassing the tenant, and when it makes sense for the tenant to take personal responsibility. 
default&#xa0;
default2.4 Should the cur
defaultrent commitment to direct payments remain then t
defaulthe ability for direct payments to revert back to the landlord at a two month trigger point is welcome and necessary; 
defaultas is the intention to allow potential reversion to be discussed after one month. B
defaultut for m
defaultany vulnerable tenants 
defaultthe uncertainty and anxiety caused during these initial weeks 
defaultcould be avoided entirely 
defaultif the landlord and the tenant could agree at the outset how best rent was to be paid.
default&#xa0;
default3. Household benefit capdefault3.1 Allowing those living within
default supported accommodation to come within the total benefit cap, whilst ignoring 
defaultactual 
defaulthelp with housing costs when calculating the cap 
defaultfor anyone in exempt accommodation, is extremely complicated.  In practice, those living in exempt accommodation are ofte
defaultn disabled and by ignoring both their housing costs and disability benefits, the majority fall well 
defaultbelow 
defaultthe cap. 
defaultHowever the
default current definition of exempt accommodation remains far from clear
default.
default 
defaultT
defaulthis means that those living in supported accommodation which is not considered exempt 
defaultface having
default their total benefits capped
default; even though their circumstances may differ very little from those in exempt accommodation.
default&#xa0;
default3.2 We feel strongly that it is time 
defaultfor the definition of exempt accommodation to be clarified for providers, local authorities and tenants. W
defaulte also feel that w
defaulthatever the final definition, 
defaultthe cap would be greatly simplified by omitting all supported
default housing as this would ensure that those 
defaultof working age living in supported housing can receive the full support of the welfare system which they need.
default 
default&#xa0;
default4. defaultSocialdefault sector size criteriadefault4.1 Evidence of application of the social sector size criteria so far indicates that this is counter productive 
defaultand cannot achieve the stated aim of better use of housing stock. 
default4.2 
defaultWe are 
defaultparticularly concerned that the criteria penalise 
defaultboth 
defaultdisabled couples and single claimants who require an additional bedroom for health reasons – whether this be a medical need
default to sleep separately, or to accommodate essential medical equipment. 
defaultT
defaulthis is often likely to be the case in supported housing
default as those with such medical needs also have wider support needs
default; and as much supported housing is not currently considered to be ex
defaultempt
default from the size criteria
default, vulnerable disabled people are disadvantaged. Indeed, many 
defaultmay 
defaultnot need high levels of other support
default, but
default 
defaultdo
default actually need the extra bedroom
default as a form of support to maintain their independence and well being.
default&#xa0;
default4.3 
defaultSince 2006 
defaultDepartment of Health funding for new extra care developments has specified that properties should have 3 habitable rooms. This is still the case for Home and Communities Agency funding. New schemes are funded and developed on this bas
defaultis
default. The Department for
default Work and Pension will now potentially say that this is too large for the household's needs and the resident will see a reduction in their housing benefit entitlement due to the size criteria restrictions
default.
default&#xa0;
default4.4 
defaultFor many disabled people in the social sector
default, downsizing therefore will not be an option. However those who cannot afford to retain the spare bedroom may be forced to look to alternative accommodation in the private sector which may not 
defaultultimately be cheaper, and which will not reduce the benefits b
defaultill. 
defaultThe lack of suitable alternative accommodation is a major concern. The availability of one bedroom properties puts severe restrictions and limitation on the ability for people to downsize. People are often stuck in a situation where there housing bene
defaultfit entitlement is restricted as the property is deemed too large for their needs but there is no smaller accommodation available.
default&#xa0;
default4.
default5
default 
defaultWe are concerned about adults with disabilities and are unsure as to why disabled children are not expected to have to s
defaulthare a bedroom whereas a recent 
defaultH
defaultigh 
defaultC
defaultourt judgement has said that disabled adults are expected to share a bedroom. Often with older people, even if they wanted to share a bedroom, this is not always practical a
defaults a result of health problems. We realise tha
defaultt this
default recent judicial review does not support our contention that those with a proven disability and medical need for an extra bedroom should be able to receive help with the cost of this
default. However we remain convinced
default that it is still appropriate 
defaultthat the 
defaultimplications and impact upon vulnerable disabled claimants should be reconsidered
default as part of this review
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default5. defaultLocaliseddefault council tax supportdefault5.1 
defaultWe all 
defaultwork across a large number of local authorit
defaulties
default, and 
defaultare 
defaultun
defaultaware of any which have not adhered to the 
defaultguidance that vulnerable claimants should not receive less council tax support than they did previously under Council Tax Benefit.
default This is welcome; however we fear that as local authority budgets become more restricted, the lack of a national system will i
defaultncreasingly lead to local variation and the ‘postcode lottery’ principle.
default&#xa0;
default5.2 Without a national demand led system, local circumstances and budgetary pressures will inevitably mean that disabled people and those in supported accommodation will eventually 
defaultfind that the level of help they can expect with council tax varies between areas, irrespective of their personal circumstances. This will undermine the support that they receive elsewhere, and the safety net will become increasingly disjointed and fragmen
defaultted.
default6. Tdefaultreatment of housing costs within Universal Creditdefault6.1
default 
defaultOur 
defaultmajor concerns concentrate on the following areas –
default service charge provisions; benefit overlaps when moving home; temporary absence provisions; waiting periods; and notification of housing cost awards.
default&#xa0;
default6.2
default defaultService charge provisions are restricted in comparison to Housing Benefit.default 
defaultThe principles appear to assume that the majority of working age claimants occupy straightforward property with very little in the way of services apart from fairly standard items such as refuse collection, car parking, gardening. The new service charge pr
defaultovisions do not sufficiently reflect the complexity of 
defaultsupported housing and the additional facilities this may provide.
defaultWe hope that the provisions for window cleaning costs are not replicated in any service charge provision for older people, as we consid
defaulter that it is unhelpful for anyone living in sheltered housing to be expected to 
defaultclean
default windows at any level.
default&#xa0;
default6.3
default defaultLack of any provision for overlap of benefit when moving home.default defaultIt is extremely difficult for those on the lowest incomes to pay for a notice period as well as the rent for a new property when moving home. The majority of disabled people and those needing supported housing do not move on a whim, but because they need m
defaultore suitable accommodation. Without help with housing costs, many will be unable to accept the 
defaultaccommodation they badly need and local strategies to meet specific housing need will not be met.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis lack of provision to meet housing costs for a notice peri
defaultod is also likely to affect those wishing to downsize to avoid social sector size criteria penalties. We do not believe that discretionary housing payment funding will remain sufficient to cover this, and that these provisions act as a deterrent to the aim
default of achieving better use of housing stock nationally.
default&#xa0;default6.4 
defaultA standard six month provision for absence from home.default defaultA blanket provision for absence from home for any reason provides administrative simplicity, but lacks fairness
default. Replacing the present 13 week
default absence rule within Housing Benefit with six months for Universal Credit, provides an over generous opportunity for those who are not genuinely occupying the property as their home; whilst simultaneously penalising the sick and disabled who may need to sp
defaultend an extended time in hospital or nursing care. Such claimants will be forced into a choice between rent arrears or not receiving the nursing care and support they need. Ultimately for some this will lead to increased dependence upon state resources at a
default far higher cost.
default6.5
default Tdefaulthe decision to apply the waiting period to the whole Universal Credit award.   defaultWe 
defaultunderstand that this will only apply to claimants who are expected to work and have full work-related requirements; but it is unclear how this might a
defaultffect vulnerable and disabled claimants. There are many with disabilities 
defaultthat
default are expected and able to work, and who wish to do so
default; however they may find themselves placed in the full work requirement group. Many will already find that they receive less 
defaulthelp 
defaultthrough premiums within Universal Credit, and having to wait an extra 7 days before receiving any housing costs will place an additional obstacle in their way.
default&#xa0;
defaultOverall we consider that a total waiting period of up to 38 days before a first payment is
default made will penalise those on the lowest incomes who are most in need of help at the start of their claim. This does not accurately reflect the world of work for many low paid workers who are not usually expected to work their first week without getting pai
defaultd at all; and who are often paid weekly rather than salaried monthly. No one on a salary is expected to wait that long for their first payment. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAn increase in those on very low incomes who are desperately short of money at the start of their claim, will 
defaultlead to an increase in requests for help via local welfare provision – at a time when local schemes are already providing less assistance due to restricted funding. 
defaultScarce resources will therefore be further pressured by the poorest having nowhere else to 
defaultturn for assistance during the extended waiting period. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe 
defaultstrongly 
defaultfeel that the precise detail of how this provision will apply to vulnerable and disabled people 
defaulttherefore 
defaultneeds further careful consideration. 
default&#xa0;
default6.6
default&#xa0; 
defaultNotification of amount of housing costs. defaultAlthough Universal Credit is meant to replicate a wage by being paid as a single payment, we see no purpose in not clearly identifying actual amounts towards housing costs within the award. We hope that everyone will receive notification of awards which c
defaultlearly show how much help is being provided towards housing costs
default, as this will assist in supporting claimants towards managing their own payments.
default&#xa0;
default7. Implications of future changes for older peopledefault7.1 
defaultA
defaultll three 
defaultproviders 
defaultappreciate that how support for 
defaulthousing costs is delivered for older people is outside the scope of this inquiry; but we do not want to miss the opportunity to comment on this. We urge that very careful consideration is given to how help towards housing costs within Pension Credit is det
defaultermined, and how this aligns with Universal Credit provisions.
default7.2 We consider that the issues of eligible service charges, overlap of benefit for two homes, and period of absence from home for hospital or respite care, would pose significant problems for 
defaultolder people should these provisions be replicated within Pension Credit. There would be consequences for older people being able to downsize from family homes
default, as well as the inability to move to smaller suitable supported accommodation. This would lead t
defaulto many being unable to remain living 
defaultindependently for longer, with consequent increased social care costs. We remain convinced that such consequences would be unintended and counter productive.
default&#xa0;
default7.3 In conclusion, w
defaulte are aware that the DWP are currently r
defaulteviewing the definition of 'exempt accommodation' status for housing benefit purposes. The current definition states that the landlord or a person acting on their behalf also provides the claimant with care, support or supervision. The government is pushin
defaultg the personalisation agenda, whereby people are encouraged to receive direct payments rather than care packages organised by Social Services. With personalisation, the landlord is less like to be involved in the provision of care as individuals will take 
defaultresponsibility for organising their own care.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is very important 
defaultfor 
defaultthe new definition of exempt accommodation that this is factored in, particularly in relation to extra care properties. 
default&#xa0;
default26 
defaultSeptember 
default2013
default&#xa0;
default7
default&#xa0;
default