Written evidence submitted by the Terence Higgins Trust (LAI 0042)default&#xa0;
default1. Introduction
default&#xa0;
default1.1 
default              
defaultTerrence Higgins Trust is the UK’s largest HIV and sexual health charity, with 32 service centres across the UK. We are a campaigning and membership organisation which advocates on behalf of people living with or affected by HIV or poor sexual health.
default&#xa0;
default1.2
default              
defaultWe provide services for people living with HIV to manage their condition and access emotional and practical support. These include one-to-one counselling, peer support groups, health trainers and information and advice covering benefits, housing, fin
defaultances, employment and immigration. We also deliver community based clinical services, such as 
defaultchlamydia
default screening and rapid HIV testing, and health promotion campaigns and initiatives which target populations most at risk of HIV and poor sexual health. 
default&#xa0;
default1
default.3
default              
defaultTerrence Higgins Trust welcomes the opportunity to respond to this consultation on Legal Aid. We would urge the government to consider the long term implications of the proposed cuts and seek alternative solutions that will not have such a drastic impac
defaultt on access to justice. 
default&#xa0;
default2. Key recommendations 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3. Questions
default&#xa0;
default3.1
default 
defaultTerrence Higgins Trust firmly disagrees with th
defaulte proposal to remove legal aid from prisoners. 
defaultThe treatment of prisoners should be given the same recourse to legal aid and justice as any other citizen
default. Removing access to le
defaultgal aid and independent review will place individuals at high risk of neglect, potentially reverting precedence through case law in recent years. 
default&#xa0;
default3.3 
defaultCurrent cases often reach court following an attempt to resolve the issue through the prison complaints
default system. If the prison complaints system is unable to resolve a problem there must still be access to the judicial system. Prisoners with HIV, blood borne viruses, STIs or any other health issue need to have access to legal advice and support to ensure tha
defaultt any mistreatment is raised and dealt with appropriately. 
defaultEqually provision of access to safer sex materials is an ongoing issue in prisons and in a recent response to the Commission on Sex in Prison we have evidence
defaultd
default the continuing problems in prison wit
defaulth limited access to safer sex materials. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4 
defaultCases of prisoners requiring legal advice for health related matters are low in number but nonetheless must have recourse to legal aid. 
defaultWe do not believe that an internal prisons complaints system will have 
defaultth
defaulte robust independent structure that the legal system has and 
defaulti
defaultnstitutions such as prisons should not be excluded from 
defaultthe checks and balances that the legal system provides. 
defaultIn addition, as prison healthcare is provided by NHS England it would not be appro
defaultpriate for matters to be 
defaultdealt with internally within the prison system when an external organisation is responsible. 
defaultThe NHS should not be
default 
defaultexcluded from the law by 
defaultvirtue
default of the setting
default in which the service is provided
default. 
defaultThe example below explains the 
defaultimportance of legal aid for prisoners and the link with the health care services.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSam was a long term prisoner in a high security prison. 
defaultC
defaultondoms were in theory accessible on all other wings if prisoners were prepared to line up and ask f
defaultor one at a time
default from the nurse. However,
default Sam’s wing was separately medically managed from the rest of the prison, by the local Mental Health Trust. Their senior nurse decided that patients on that wing would not be supplied with condoms because he would not condone sexua
defaultl conduct between what he saw as “vulnerable” prisoners. THT’s arguments that unprotected sexual activity was already happening and in itself leaving people vulnerable to HIV and other STIs did not work until Sam used legal aid to bring a case against the 
defaultprison. Without legal aid, condoms would not have been made available to all prisoners and they would continue to be at risk of poor sexual health and life-threatening diseases.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4) Introducing a residence test
default4.
default1 
defaultTerrence Higgins Trust strongly 
defaultdisagrees with the proposals to introduce a residence test. Legal Aid is a valuable resource for people in the UK to be able challenge the state and defend their rights. This
default residency test wou
defaultl
defaultd
default isolate vulnerab
defaultle individuals with 
defaulta 
defaultvalid need to access t
defaulthe judicial system.
default For example, individuals who have been refused permanent leave to remain who have a health condition such as HIV and who would wish to challenge the decision on the basis of their ongoing health and wellbeing would no longer be
default able to 
defaultaccess legal aid.
default4.2 
defaultThe needs of asylum seekers should not be 
defaultoverlooked;
default whilst it is an improvement to apply the residency test from the date the asylum application is submitted it is still too restrictive and only applies to successful applicants. Given asylum seekers are normally unable to work it would not be representativ
defaulte of a fair society if they were unable to defend themselves with the relevant legal expertise. It is important to provide legal support 
defaultto people when they need it. 
defaultIndividuals establishing a new life should have the same access to
default fair and equal judgment
default with
default legal support as any other resident in the UK
default. I
defaultt is entirely unacceptable to provide Legal Aid to someone who has not lived in the UK for decades and to ignore the needs of someone living in the UK and contributing to society.  
default4.3 
defaultA
defaultnyone 
defaultgiven 
defaultper
defaultmission to rem
defaultain for a specific time period, for example
default until they turn
default18
default,
default would not be able to seek the right to remain permanently as they have not been a reside
defaultnt for 12 months based on the specifications and requirements of the proposed structure. An
defaulty child living with HIV who has built a life in the UK should be able to access the support that they need to challenge decisions about their ongoing residency. 
default4.4 
defaultFrom a practical perspective placing the responsibility on the solicitor to establish an i
defaultndividual’s resid
defaultency status is also problematic. Proving legal status is often a complex issue and will require specific expertise and additional time and resource. There is a great risk that individuals could be incorrectly prohibited from legal aid if t
defaulthe provider is unable to gain proof. 
default4.5 
defaultIndividuals will not always have relevant paperwork and there is a risk that discrimination of individuals due to government bodies and agencies mistakes or failure to provide paperwork. There will also be situatio
defaultns where vulnerable individuals may have had to leave their residence without being able to find papers and evidence of their residency status. 
default5. 
defaultAccess to topic experts
default5.1 
defaultH
defaultaving a solicitor
default who specialises in the
default 
defaultrelevant area of law who
default is able to exper
defaulttly represent 
defaultthe individual 
defaultto achieve the best possible outcome is essential. The current proposals mean that an individual 
defaultwould not necessarily be able to 
defaultseek out t
defaulthe best candidate for their case
default. 
defaultIt is in both the state’s and the 
defaultin
defaultdividual’s
default best
default interest
default to 
defaultbe able to 
defaultchoose
default the most qualified legal aid provider
default. T
defaulthese proposals wil
defaultl undermine that and will risk miscarriages of justice in specialised cases
default.
default 
default5.2 
defaultAn example of specialist knowledge would be in a case prosecuting against an individual for the transmission of 
defaultHIV. These cases are rare and 
defaultcomplex;
default they require expert knowledge and understanding of previous cases. 
defaultThere are very few legal aid providers
default with this expertise and access to them should be available across the country. It is essential that there are not geographical limitations. 
defaultProviding an ind
defaultividual with a
default local legal aid provider would risk a miscarriage of justice. An alternative system 
defaultallowing legal aid providers to register particular expertise at a local and national level would enable individuals to access the most qualified representative. 
default5.3 
defaultIt is unreasonable to expect solicitors to be ex
defaultperts in all areas of law. 
defaultThe proposals 
defaultrisk wasting public funds if a case is not comprehensively made by the most appropriate solicitor
default,
default with expert knowledge. 
defaultThe proposed approach risks poor representation
default of
default cases and an unjust use of the legal system and its practitioners. 
default5.4 
defaultT
defaulthere is
default also
default the added risk that individuals will choose to represent themselves. This is highly likely if they do not have confidence in their assigned solicitor’s ability or trust them. For any person living with HIV disclosure is difficult and for this to happ
defaulten there needs to be a relationship of trust. If an individual’s HIV status is relevant to the case and they do not trust or have confidence in the legal aid provider this will severely jeopardise their case in court. 
default5.5 
defaultThese proposals risk 
defaultcre
defaultating
default a t
defaultwo tiered legal system preventing some of the most vulnerable members
default of society to achieve justice.
default&#xa0;
defaultDavid worked for a major supermarket chain and had done for several years. When he was diagnosed with HIV he was told he needed to go onto treatment immed
defaultiately. He disclosed to his line manager, who gave him three months “gardening leave” to get used to the treatments and his diagnosis. However, at the end of the 3 months, his employer told him not to return as senior managers had decided that his HIV migh
defaultt deter customers from shopping there, were it publicly known. They went so far as to put this in writing. Despite this being an obvious breach of equality law, the employer fought the case all the way to the day of the tribunal and only settled with David
default that morning. Without legal aid, David would have been unable to pursue the case and without good legal advice he would 
defaultnot have known that the employer was likely to cave on the morning of the trial, having only held out that long in hopes that David wou
defaultld fear the publicity of a tribunal appearance more than they would.
default&#xa0;
default5
default.
default6
default To allocate cases according 
defaultto an arbitrary process will not provide a robust and credible legal aid system. With certain cases such as the criminalisation of HIV transmission it requires a particular set of expertise. The cases are incredibly rare and it would be far more credible t
defaulto allocate them on a case by case basis to the most qualified and experienced provider, regardless of location. 
default&#xa0;
default5.7
default 
defaultCase allocation should be a combination of provider expertise and client choice. Anything less would risk resulting in cases breaking down
default and miscarriages of justice and grave consequences. One such example is explained below.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultTHT was contacted by a man with HIV who, on the advice of his generalist criminal law defender, had pleaded guilty to reckless GBH by sexual transmission. On reviewing the case, it was immediately obvious to us that the requirement for scientific proof of 
defaulttransmission had not been met to the agreed standard. It transpired that his defence had simply asked the prosecution whether the CPS medical report was proof of transmission and they had asserted that it was (when in fact it was not, and has repeatedly be
defaulten shown in other cases to be insufficient). 
default&#xa0;
defaultAlthough we contacted a specialist lawyer who was willing to represent him in a request to change his plea, the judge refused leave, resulting in the defendant fleeing the country and being sentenced in absent
defaultia. The defendant later died as a result of lack of access to specialist treatment while on the run. THT also knows of at least two other cases where a defendant was allowed to belatedly change their plea after they were initially gravely misadvised by a g
defaulteneralist criminal solicitor provided by the police.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default6
default.
default Paying for permission work in judicial review cases
default. 
defaultDo you agree with the proposal that providers should only be paid for work carried out on an application for judicial review, including a request for reconsideration of the application at a hearing, the renewal hearing, or an onward permission appeal to th
defaulte Court of Appeal, if permission is granted by the Court (but that reasonable disbursements should be payable in any event)? Please give reasons. 
default6
default.1 
defaultThis proposal will inevitably prompt cautious behaviour and in turn prevent applications for judicial reviews. 
defaultIt is essential that all individuals, groups and public bodies are equal before the law and answerable to it. 
defaultGovernment bodies and agencies shou
defaultld be held accountable to the law and 
defaultforced 
defaultto review decisions where
default illogical decisions have been made
default; 
defaultthese proposals
default will stop thi
defaults from happening. 
default6
default.2 
defaultWithout 
defaultguaranteed 
defaultaccess to legal aid for judicial review it will result in reduced access only 
defaultfor individuals or organisations prepared to take a risk and pay for the cost 
defaulto
defaultf judicial review application is granted. Access to justice should not be based on the ability to pay. Such a system would ostracise the vulnerable in society and result in furt
defaulther neglect.
default 
default7
default.
default Civil merits test – removing legal aid for borderline cases 
default7
default.
default1 
defaultIt is not always clear from the outset what the prospects of a case are and there are examples where whilst the prospects might be low or borderline the public interest and 
defaultconsequence is of high importan
defaultce. To ignore these cases based 
defaulton an initial judgement that they are not likely to succeed is
default 
defaultunacceptable. 
defaultThis is particularly the case of those which just miss the 50 per cent cut off. 
default&#xa0;
default7
default.2 There is a lack of clarity on 
defaulthow the likely success of a case will be decided. 
defaultAdditional evidence often comes to light
default through questioning that changes the expected outcome. Making a decision regarding funding prior to a hearing will inevitably prevent some individuals from achieving
default justice simply because they appeared unlikely to succeed.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default