Written evidence submitted by defaultKaren May (LAI 0043)default&#xa0;
defaultI am a solicitor with 16 year experience acting in Judicial Review Cases. Before becoming a Legal Aid Solicitor acting for Claimants, I acted a
defaults a Local Authority Solicitor. Please see below 
defaultan earlier document I prepared “Transforming Legal Aid Consultation: Response” upon which I also rely. I have also had sight of Dr Nick Armstrong’s submission (a barrister from Matrix Chambers) and would endo
defaultrse those detailed submissions wholeheartedly.
default&#xa0;
defaultI remain very concerned that the cuts to Legal Aid will mean cutting people off from justice. My main experience is in relation to judicial review and I note the judicial review legal aid proposal is that la
defaultwyers will not be paid unless the Court has granted permission to apply for judicial review. This proposal raises massive concerns for what legal scrutiny there will now be of state action. Many of the strongest cases never reach the permission stage of ju
defaultdicial review because Local Authorities settle. The way the proposal is now worded will force issuing of proceedings, when the reality is courts encourage parties to try and resolve matters if at all possible before issuing. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease see attached case stud
defaulty 3 in the 
defaultbelow
default paper: AES and Siblings. It will be noted that was an extremely strong case and a significant amount of work was carried out in preparing to issue proceedings. On the eve of proceedings being issued, the Local Authority finally conceded an
defaultd
default arranged suitable accommodation. This was an excellent result for the client. Unfortunately, 
defaultthe 
defaultnew proposals seem to be saying that in this type of case the Legal Aid Solicitor would be expected to do this work for nothing because proceedings have not 
defaultactually been issued. Clearly, solicitors who are already struggling are not going to be able to work for free and in this type of case the vulnerable will be left without assistance and Local Authorities will be able to 
defaultblatantly
default disregard their legal obl
defaultigations. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe MOJ now appears to be saying that if a case has been issued but settles without permission having been granted, there may be some discretion about paying the lawyers if there is a good reason why the Defendant has not been ordered to pay co
defaultsts. There are a large number of community care judicial review cases where the Claimant is entirely correct to issue proceedings based upon the facts at the time. However, if issuing proceedings focuses the Local Authority’s mind and leads to an assessmen
defaultt
default/service provision, by the time the case comes before the Judge, it is possible that permission may not be granted because the Local Authority has now done what is expected of them. In such cases, the Claimant will not automatically get costs and there on
defaultce again runs the risk of unpaid work despite an excellent result being achieved for the client. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAnother factor is to consider how many cases actually fall within the particular category of being issued and settling without permission having been granted
default. The reality is that many more cases are of the type described in the case study i.e. substantial work being carried out and the Defendant settling on the eve of issuing proceedings.
default&#xa0;
defaultKAREN MAYdefaultASSOCIATE SOLICITORdefaultJOHN FORD SOLICITORS defaultTransforming Legadefaultl Aid Consultation: ResponsedefaultI make this response as solicitor who acted as a Local Authority solicitor for four years before becoming a legal aid solicitor in 1999.  I therefore have experience of representing the public sector as well as individual claimants (with the benefit of leg
defaultal aid) in Judicial Review cases.  I know the importance of Judicial Review as a way of there being public scrutiny of important public sector decisions.  I do not believe that the proposals are workable, for the following reasons: 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultCase Studiesdefault&#xa0;
defaultThis is a judicial review which has benefitted from legal aid and concerns a very vulnerable child.  I acted for JE in relation to matters concerning community care and special educational needs.  JE had had a terrible hist
defaultory of abuse with social services intervention.  He was then placed successfully with very supportive grandparents who have done their best for him.  However, JE’s difficulties are such that there is still a need for specialised support from the local auth
defaultority.  JE has Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Oppositional Defiance Disorder.  There are also investigations in relation to other conditions such as Tourettes Syndrome, Autism and Feotal Alcohol Syndrome.  He also has a heart condition and at
defaulttachment difficulties due to the abuse he experienced as a young child.  
default&#xa0;
defaultDespite these difficulties, the local authority were failing to put in place suitable education under section 19 of the Education Act 1996, following JE’s exclusion from school.  In
default addition, the local authority had failed to carry out a lawful assessment and produce a much needed care plan under section 17 of the Children Act 1989.  
defaultThe important point in relation to the legal aid consultation is that there were clear grounds for j
defaultudicial review and judicial review proceedings were issued on 10
defaultth
default January 2013.  
defaultDespite the court recognising the concerns for JE’s welfare permission for judicial review was not granted until May 2013.  Between January and May 2013 there was extensive work in terms of taking instructions from JE’s grandparents, negotiations with the 
defaultlocal authority and two court hearings in another area of the country (away from solicitor and Counsel).  This area of law is a very specialist area and already cuts mean that there are only a few firms left in the country who have the expertise to deal wi
defaultth these cases.  
defaultThe reality was many thousands of pounds had been incurred, including a very important assessment by an independent educational psychologist to provide practical proposals upon the way forward for JE.  The reason the court put off grantin
defaultg permission until May 2013 was to give the parties an opportunity to work together and for the local authority to agree to take detailed steps to try and put right the situation.  For example, at a first court hearing the local authority gave undertakings
default to the court to take certain steps to comply with their legal obligations (which have been neglected until that point).  Unfortunately, those undertakings were not complied with and at the next court hearing the court needed to grant permission.  
defaultThe poi
defaultnt is there is no way that a small legal aid firm could have funded the significant legal costs involved in relation to the expert report, the solicitor’s work and Counsel’s appearance at two court hearings before the point when permission was granted in M
defaultay.   It is unconscionable to expect solicitors to assume the risk of not being paid if permission is not granted.  In practice they will not undertake  this work at all. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis case is a case which has benefitted from a number of legal aid certificates
default for judicial review over the years and that funding has been absolutely essential in putting pressure upon the local authority to meet JF’s needs.  JF is severely autistic and despite the local authority agreeing she needed a fairly robust care package wi
defaultth very specific provision for hours of support during the week and at weekends, the care plan was not complied with.
defaultI
defaultt was necessary to bring two judicial reviews and ultimately the case ended up in the Court of Protection where LJ Mumby, commented upon 
defaultthe significant failures on the part of the local authority in implementing the care package.  It was essential for there to be that court scrutiny to put the pressure on the local authority to comply with their legal obligations.  This is a very vulnerabl
defaulte family with younger children and JF’s challenging behaviour could present significant dangers within the family home.  
defaultWithout legal aid solicitors to represent JF, the situation at home would have undoubtedly had broken down with the possibility of the 
defaultstate having to incur significant further costs in caring for the children.
defaultHowever, the litigation in JF’s case has also involved the court giving the local authority an opportunity to try to resolve matters.  In the first judicial review, proceedings 
defaultwere issued on 27.07.10 but permission for judicial review was not granted until 11.10.10.  It was a difficult case, which needed to be brought and legal aid was essential for the family, in receipt of state benefits.
default&#xa0;
defaultThese were three sibl
defaultings who were granted public funding certificates for judicial review proceedings to be issued.  These three children would be homeless on the street if it were not for legal aid.  The children’s mother was not permitted to have access to public funds and 
defaulthad been staying with a friend.  That arrangement broke down and three children who had been born in the UK (with the older two attending schools in London), and being well established within the communities, were going to be street homeless.  
defaultCareful and
default specialist advice was given regarding the obligations under section 17 of the Children Act 1989, that the local authority owed to these children.  There were clear grounds for judicial review proceedings faced with the local authority’s refusal to act to 
defaultprovide accommodation for these children.  Very careful negotiations were entered into and detailed correspondence.  In addition, Counsel was instructed and grounds for judicial review proceedings were prepared.  However, on the eve of proceedings being ab
defaultout to be issued the local authority recognised their legal obligations and placed the children in accommodation with their mother.  Therefore, proceedings were not ultimately issued.  However, a significant amount of work had been carried out in preparing
default to issue proceedings as well as the extensive correspondence with the local authority.  An excellent result was achieved but as permission had not been granted by a court, under the new arrangements it is difficult to see how this work could have been fun
defaultded.  The fact that expert negotiations secured a successful settlement, ultimately saved costs as there was not a need for expensive legal proceedings but legal aid was needed to cover the work involved.  
defaultSeptember 2013
default