&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitteddefault by Surrey Welfare Rights Unit.defaultSurrey Welfare Rights Unit (SWRU) is a charity and a member of Citizens Advice.  
defaultSWRU welcomes the opportunity to contribute this evidence to the Committee’s inquiry.  
defaultThe Unit is a second-tier organisation that supports advisers with complex benefits issues.  It provides training, an advice line and undertakes social policy work at a 
defaultlocal and national level.  For this inquiry SWRU consulted with over 60 loc
defaultal organisations.  The evidence included in this document was provided by those local organisations.
default  In particular, the Surrey CABx network has seen a 35% increase in rent arrears 
defaultqueries in Q1 of 2013 when compared to Q1 in 2012, and a 13% increase in council tax arrears queries.  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultChanges to the age limit for the shared accommodation ratedefaultSince the announcement in 2011 that the shared accommodatio
defaultn rate was to be extended to under 35s local advice organisations in Surrey have been concerned that the housing market does not offer sufficient provision for benefit claimants requiring accommodation of this type.  Single claimants between t
defaulthe ages of 25
default and 35 often have children with whom they need to keep parental contact and preferably would have to come and stay with them.  This is not possible with just a single room in a shared house.  A few months prior to when the change was introduced a local Su
defaultrrey CAB conducted a short survey looking at availability of single rooms in the Guildford and Blackwater Valley Broad Market Rental Areas.  Using online property search sites and local newspapers the research revealed only 6 rooms were available within cu
defaultrrent LHA rates offered by landlords who would accept benefit claimants.  In many cases accommodation was offered to “professionals only” and some adverts still stated “no DSS”.   This extremely low level of availability was the local situation before 25-3
default5 year old claimants would also be seeking that same accommodation type.
default&#xa0;
defaultA CAB client in west Surrey rents a one-bedroom flat.  
defaultHe is 32 years old.  His children from a previous relationship come and stay with him 3 nights per week.  
defaultHi
defaults employer ceased trading in April 2013 and the client claimed 
defaultJobseekers Allowance and 
defaultHousing Benefit.  After 13 weeks the single room restriction applied and the client now has a £280 rent shortfall per month.  His home is at risk and if he ends up havi
defaultng to rent a single room his children will not be able to stay over.  
default&#xa0;
defaultA
default CAB client in north w
defaultest Surrey had been renting a one-bedroom flat for several years.  He had convictions for assault in the past and he suffered with mental health issues including
default paranoia.  He is 33 years old.  He is in the Support Group of Employment and Support Allowance and his DLA care component is paid at lower rate which does not exempt him from the single room rent restriction.  His renewal application for a discretionary h
defaultousing payment has been turned down. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe introduction of the social housing size criteria rules have had an unprecedented negative impact on some tenants.  Furthermore advice organisations predict that the size criteria rule w
defaultill continue to affect current tenants long into the future as they run out of savings or can no longer budget for rent shortfalls from already stretched low incomes.  
defaultCABx and other advice organisations have seen the human distress caused by this rule cha
defaultnge.  The lack of suitable alternative accommodation suggests that this policy will take several years to achieve its outcomes but in the meantime tenants are forced into rent shortfalls and 
defaultincreasing pressure is placed on discretionary housing payment fu
defaultnds.  
defaultApart from the emotional investment that many households have put into their homes, in some cases councils have also invested thousands of pounds making adaptations to meet disabled tenants needs. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA Surrey CAB saw a client who is 61 and has a long term mental health condition.  He has lived in his 2-bed flat since 1950’s as it was his parents’ home.  He is having to make up the shortfall in his Housing Benefit from his DLA.  
default&#xa0;
defaultA CAB in Surrey
default advise
defaultd a female client who had rented her home for over 21 years.  She had raised her family there but now faced a 25% “bedroom tax” on her eligible rent.  The client is recovering from breast cancer 
defaultand currently cannot contemplate moving.  There is no delay u
defaultnder any circumstance in applying the bedroom tax.
default&#xa0;
defaultA tenant in west Surrey sought advice from his local CAB about his ESA being sanctioned.  The client is now appealing the decision but whilst waiting for his hearing, which could take many months, he is s
defaulturviving on hardship payments of £39 per week.  He has also received a bedroom tax decision and now has to pay £38 per month towards his rent. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA Carer Support organisation in Surrey was contacted by a Carer who looks after her severely disabled adult dau
defaultghter.  Her other adult child has left home and the Carer, who is the tenant, now has a 14%
default 
defaultbedroom tax decision.
default  
defaultThe home has had thousands of pounds spent by the council on adaptations and the third bedroom is used occasionally by carers to give the cli
defaultent respite.  A room used by a carer 
defaultto stay over would not count for bedroom tax purposes if the disabled daughter was the Housing Benefit claimant but she does not have capacity.
default&#xa0;
defaultA CAB in north west Surrey saw a client who is in receipt of DLA and ESA. 
default She has received a “bedroom tax” decision which means that she now has to pay an extra £15 per week towards her rent.  She applied for a Discretionary Housing Payment with supporting evidence from her community psychiatric nurse, her social worker and her
default psychiatrist all stating that it would be detrimental to her health if she had to move.  She was refused the payment. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn many cases, local Council Tax Support (CTS) schemes mean that low income residents now have to make small payments to their local Councils where previously Council Tax Benefit would have met that liability in full.  This means that the full impact of th
defaulte introduction of CTS has probably not yet happened.  The concern is that a single month’s default can swiftly escalate to court action.  It is likely that arrears building up now will move to court proceedings over the next months.  
defaultAcross Surrey we have
default 11 different borough and district based schemes ranging from the default scheme
default,
default which protects low income households to the same
default level as Council Tax Benefit, to one CTS that now only provides maximum support of 70%
default.  
defaultFor the future, council tax limits 
defaultwill be set locally and in many cases will exceed the 1% uprating that means-tested benefit claimants will experience in future years.  It is highly likely that CTS schemes will provide less and less financial support unless central Government provides add
defaultitional funding for those schemes.  Without additional support for low income fami
defaultlies, there will be significant levels of default and court proceedings as well as declining council tax collection rates at a local level.  
default&#xa0;
defaultA CAB in west Surrey saw three 
defaultclients in one week who had received summons for non- payment of Council Tax.  The Council still had not processed applications 
defaultto the CTS hardship fund and had to suspend the court action when hardship funds were awarded.  One client had post-natal depres
defaultsion and had made a suicide attempt shortly before receiving her summons.
default&#xa0;
defaultA Surrey CAB was contacted by a single parent in receipt of Income Support.  She had been notified by her local council that she now had to pay 20% council tax, £15.17 per month.  H
defaulter son’s father had disappeared and she was no longer receiving any maintenance for him.  She had re-done her budget many times but her income had not changed and she did not know how she was going to pay this new significant bill each month.  
default&#xa0;
defaultOne Surrey
default council provides additional CTS to residents who are in receipt of a severe or enhanced disability premium.  A CAB client in his 40’s sought advice on how to cope now he had to pay £160 council tax
default annually
default.  He has schizophrenia and is in receipt of Seve
defaultre Disablement Allowance.  His lower rate DLA does not provide him with one of these premiums.  
default27 September 2013
default&#xa0;
default