&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the Sadlers House Management Company
default 
default(SLC 026)
default&#xa0;
defaultBACKGROUND
default&#xa0;
defaultIn September, 2012, my wife and I returned to live Enfield, where we both born. In deciding where to live, we
default investigated many locations, and homed in on the Bush Hill Park area where with the somewhat rural environment and the Conservation Area status our search was narrowed to the Wellington Road/Village Road area.
defaultWe viewed a number of properties and eventual
defaultly decided on an apartment in Sadlers House, Wellington Road and were happy to acquire it and moved in from our old home in Hoddesdon, Hertfordshire.
defaultWhilst we are both drivers, another of the added advantages was the quiet nature of Wellington Road and th
defaulte availability of the “Freedom Pass” which enable to use freely Bus, Tube and Rail services.
defaultHowever, having moved into Wellington Road one of the disadvantages we soon noticed was the considerable scale of kerbside parking by commercial vehicles belonging
default to two local companies, “Par Gas” and “Liberty Gas” whose offices are located near Bush Hill Station and commuter parking.
defaultHaving made enquiries, I learnt that, despite action to seek a cessation of the parking, since the commercial vehicles were taxed, i
defaultt was not possible to remove them.
defaultIn January this year, we noticed an increase in vehicular traffic along Wellington Road and discovered that the Rail Track level crossing had been closed since the roads on the eastern side of Lincoln Road were affected b
defaulty contactors operating to replace gas mains. It was thought, apparently, that the volume of  traffic using the crossing would lead to highway problems, hence the closure.
defaultAccording the official notice at the level crossing displayed in January, the closure
default was temporary.
defaultEarlier, this year, the Borough Council employed consultants to produce a scheme for the introduction of new parking measures.
defaultIt is understood that the demand for a scheme resulted from a petition by 33 local residents claiming that commut
defaulter parking, parking by the Gas Companies and the passage of buses along the road caused danger to highway safety.
defaultDiscussions about the scheme with the Council’s Highways Officer  myself and other neighbours, led to an understanding that, following the clo
defaultsure of the level crossing, traffic counting devices had been placed in Wellington Road and surrounding roads to measure traffic flows and when the crossing was re-opened, further measurements could be taken to 
defaultdemonstrate the importance, or otherwise, of 
defaultthe level crossing.
defaultWhilst the new parking arrangements have not been announced, the general tenor on the proposals is to introduce restrictions to prevent commuter parking and generalised parking during the hours 0f 1pm - 2pm. The overall intention has be
defaulten, it is understood, to make the passage of vehicles through Wellington Road more safe.
defaultIn July of this year, I was elected Chairman and Secretary of the Sadlers House Management Committee and my fellow property owners have agreed that this representation
default is on their behalf 
default&#xa0;
defaultAPPRAISAL OF THE BENEFITS OF LINCOLN ROAD LEVEL CROSSING
default&#xa0;
defaultFrom the time I have lived in Wellington Road, my appreciation of the traffic movements in this area is that north bound traffic on London Road destined to link with the A10 - 
defaultGreat Cambridge Road used the Lincoln Road level crossing greatly. Such use would lead to the avoidance of vehicles travelling through the Enfield Town Centre to link with Southbury Road and then eastwards to the A.10.
defaultWith the closure of the level crossin
defaultg, I believe that the Town Centre traffic movement, is much greater that before the closure, so much so that traffic tail backs often occur far along London Road. Other potential conflict are evident by reason of the difficulty of traffic emerging from Lin
defaultcoln Road and Village Road in attempts to join the north bound tailback in London Road.
defaultThe level crossing closure now means that traffic movement along Wellington Road has grown with drivers using the road to link with Park Avenue, First Avenue, Trinity A
defaultvenue to the A10 Great Cambridge Road. 
defaultOther movements through Wellington Road to the A10 are via Park Avenue, First Avenue, St Marks Road, Main Avenue to Lincoln road.
defaultThe attitude of Network Rail, has led to a whole series of “Rat Runs” occurring, very 
defaultoften through roads with a high level of kerbside parking, leading to greater traffic danger.
defaultAfter the closure, it is not uncommon to see Heavy Goods Vehicles, very often of Continental origin, becoming stranded on either side of the crossing in Lincoln R
defaultoad due to SatNav directions. The considerable reversing movements to re-direct these vehicles does little to aid the free flow of traffic in the area.
default&#xa0;
defaultACTIONS BY RAILWAY AUTHORITY
default&#xa0;
defaultTo the onlooker, it is difficult to understand what has led Rail Track to its decision to take an action to prejudice many thousands of motorist. 
defaultThe recent tragedies where deaths have occurred at level crossings could be a reason.
defaultHowever, since it is st
defaultill possible for pedestrians to use the gate to cross the line, the opportunity for those tragedies to occur still remains and the closure for motorised traffic is, therefore,  of no consequence in that respect.
defaultMy recollection of the opening and closing o
defaultf the gates is that this was done, manually, by an employee of the Rail Authority who also appeared to be employed in the nearby signal box.
defaultThe cynical conclusion one must draw is that the closure is related to staff employment and in this day and age of 
defaulteconomies, Rail Track perhaps see “a saving” by the cessation of a service which has been operational for many, many years by reducing the role of the gate operator.
default&#xa0;
defaultSUMMARY
defaultRail Track is an unelected Organisation. It’s decision making motives
defaultseem far di
defaultstant from the decision making objectives of the Borough Council who are elected and, hopefully, represent the views of it’s electorate and it is the Borough Council who continue to object to the closure. 
defaultIt would also seem that Rail Track have reneged on
default any agreement between themselves and the Borough Council and if that is the case, the democratic process of government is badly damaged. Its actions nullify any survey results which were to be achieved by the traffic counts in local roads and leads to the
default costs of the survey carried out to be wasted.
defaultIt is difficult also to understand why Rail Track can close a Public Highway without recourse to the Highways Acts wherein greater public representation can occur.
defaultIt is also ironic that the actions of the Bor
defaultough Council to seek improvements of traffic safety could been seen as a waste of money if the unsustainable traffic flows increase through surrounding roads because of the unwarranted decision by Rail Track 
default&#xa0;
defaultCONCLUSIONS
defaultIt was seem that there are three o
defaultptions
default&#xa0;
default 1 Before any final decisions are made, if it is still the will of Rail Track to pursue its unwarranted action, then that process shall only be agreed following considerations under the Highways Act to close Lincoln Road to vehicular traffic, follo
defaultwing a major public consultation process.
default2 That Rail Track accede to the views of Enfield Council and many thousands of local people by re-opening the crossing in accordance with the process and hours as it previously operated.
default3. Rail Track provide a mec
defaulthanised gate system which closes the road to pedestrian and vehicular traffic at the approach of a train(s). If, as part of its cost cutting proposals, Rail Track cannot agree to such a measure, then Option 2 should prevail.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default