WWC007default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultImpetus – The Private Equity Foundation defaultUnderachievement in Education by White Working Class Children default&#xa0;defaultIdefaultntroductiondefaultThis is a response 
defaultto the Educations Select Committee’s Enquiry into 
defaultUnderachievement in Education by White Working Class
default Children
default, 
defaultfrom Impetus –
default The Private Equity Foundation. Our response is 
defaultwholly informed by 
defaultinterviews conducted for this response, with eleven of the organisations in 
defaultour portfolio 
defaultwho are
default working with young people from disadvantaged background
defaults
default, who have
default poor educational attainment, or who are at risk of doing so. 
defaultAbout Impetus – The Private Equity Foundation
defaultImpetus – The Private Equity Foundation (Impetus – PEF) accelerates the growth of innovative charities and 
defaultsocial 
defaultenterprises helping disadvantaged
default children and young people to get the start in life they deserve. 
defaultWe
default 
defaultuse 
defaulta unique model of 
defaultventure philanthropy
default, which includes management expertise, pro bono business skills and long-term funding, in order to 
defaultcapacity build and grow, 
defaultambitious 
defaultorganisations
default.
default 
defaultImpetus-PEF
default was formed in June
default 2013 following the merger of I
defaultmpetus Trust and the Private Equity Foundation. The new organisation has backed a total of 48 organisations, including 26 in its active portfolio. In 2011/12 the Impetus – PEF port
defaultfolio helped 566,000 disadvantaged people.
defaultWe also research and campaign on the topics of educational attainment and work readiness, to influence public deb
defaultate, and steer public resou
defaultrces to where they might have most impact in these areas. 
defaultAbout our port
defaultfolio
defaultWithin our 26 strong active portfolio, 11 organisations work with young people at risk of educational failure, or with those who have already ‘failed’ in mainstream education. Between them, they work all over the UK, and with boys and girls from dive
defaultrse backgrounds, including white working class
default young people
default. 
default11 
defaulthave contributed their expertise and experience to this response. They are listed in the Appendix. 
defaultWhy did we want to ask them?
defaultWe felt that the Select Committee’s Enquiry 
defaultmust 
defaultbe informed by
default the voices and views of those who are working at the frontline with white working class 
defaultchildren and young people
default, as well as with their peers from ethnic minorities. All the organisations we support have a track record of working successfully to 
defaulteither
default s
defaultupport educational attainment
default of disadvantaged young people
default, or of 
defaultworking to re-engage them in education. They are well-placed to comment on any differences in challenges to educational attainment between white working class young people compared to those
default from ethnic minorities. More importantly, they are best placed to share their successful methods of engagement that convince some of the most excluded and disadvantaged young people to reconnect with education and employment. These methods should be studi
defaulted, and reflected upon by every head teacher in the country. 
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe Responses defaultSpecific Challenges 
defaultAll 
default11
default organisations work with white working class children and young people, and most also work with significant numbers of black and minority ethnic benef
defaulticiaries too. The portfolio was split, with half responding that they did not feel white working class young people faced specific challenges that might hold back their educational achievement, and half responding that they did. 
defaultHowever, all were knowledge
defaultable about the challenges to academic achievement facing young people across economically disadvantaged groups. 
defaultOf those who perceived specific challenges, 
defaultmany commented that the home lives of their white beneficiaries seemed more chaotic, and that their
default parents were less likely to push them to attend, and achieve at
default, school, than their BME peers:
default“There is a split between ‘school culture’ and ‘family culture’ – 
defaultsome 
defaultboys don’t know how to cope with the switch between the two. What the school teaches is not 
defaultalways 
defaultreinforced at home. We actually have to provide the kids with an ‘attachmen
defaultt’ to the school, if
default parents don’t provide this.’ - 
default– 
defaultSenior Manager, charity provdefaultiding counselling services in schoolsdefault“Our white working class kids find it hard to cope. School is too much of a contrast from their life outside school and this has an effect on their ability to find employment. They haven’t learnt the basic skills of co
defaultmpliance and cooperation. The ‘skills’ they have are seen by them and their community as acceptable and necessary for life on the estates in which they live.” - 
defaultSenior Manager at a charity providing youth centres in the North Westdefault“We see Ghanaian and Bang
defaultladeshi parents who have worked hard, and they push their children to do well. Whereas our children from whi
defaultte working class chaotic backgr
defaultounds get the opposite from home.” - 
defaultManager, charity providing interventions to keep at-risk teenagers engaged in eddefaultucationdefaultThe notion that white working class parents might not be strongly inclined to support their children’s education came up several times:
default“Our data shows that our white beneficiaries have had significantly less positive family input into their educat
defaultion than have our BME beneficiaries, and that they are much more positive about work-based learning. 56% of our white intake had some positive attitudes about school learning compared to 86% amongst our BME boys. Our white intake also had significantly low
defaulter literacy scores than
default their BME peers.”
default 
default– 
defaultCEO of a charity working with young offendersdefault“We find parents 
defaultin our white working class 
defaultareas are less likely to self-ref
defaulter the
defaultir children to our services than
default in middle-class areas. They 
defaultmay be 
defaultafraid of seeki
defaultng, or receiving help, partly because of the stigma of this, but also 
defaultpossibly 
defaultbecause they feel i
defaultntimidated by a system they don’
defaultt understand, or feel part of. They 
defaultmay 
defaultbecome passive in the face of it.’
default 
default– 
defaultSenior Manager, charity providing counselling serdefaultvices in schoolsdefault“We are finding, as we’ve opened a centre in a predominantly white working class area, that we’re having to do a lo
defaultt more work with the parents tha
defaultn we did at our centres in more mixed areas. Our young people who come from immigrant famili
defaultes, their parents are not anti-education, but need extra support, and don’t know how to navigate the system. Whereas some 
defaultof 
defaultour white working class families have negative views of education, and no aspiration in that direction” 
default– 
defaultManager at a charity offedefaultring homework defaultclubs and academic supportdefaultThis respondent added that she felt 
default“
defaulthaving a parent who failed at school is a bigger barrier to educational achievement than having En
defaultglish as an additional language”
default. 
defaultAnother repeated theme was a lack of 
defaultidentity, and a sense of belonging
default, which many respondents felt affected white wo
defaultrking class boys in particular:
default “Thirty years ago, white working class communities round here were strong, now the opposite is true. The demise of the Unions and Churches in 
defaultthese communities has created a support gap. Too many boys rarely see their father go out to work. The lack of labour, and of community, has led to a lack of a sense of place or purpose. There is a lack of certainly for kids about where they will work as t
defaulthe labour market has changed dramatically” - 
defaultSenior Manager at a charity providing youth centres in the North Westdefault“Our white working class boys seem to have a less strong religious or cultural heritage to give them an expectation of staying on the straigh
defaultt and narrow. If their parents’ relationship breaks down, there’s no safety net to catch them. They drift, and the schools don’t seem likely to step in. Looking across the young people we see, it does seem that any religious influence is grounding. Our whi
defaultte working class boys just seem more lost than other groups” – 
defaultHead of Coaching for a charity working with NEETdefaultsdefaultThis respondent also reported that, working in a very ethnically mixed area of London, she felt that more of her white beneficiaries were probl
defaultem drug users (mainly cannabis) than th
defaulteir BME peers. Recreational use
default was widespread across the NEET young people her organisation works with, but she felt the white young people were more likely to spiral into habitual, debilitating use. 
defaultThose responden
defaultts who did not feel they could identify challenges specific to the white working class asserted that poverty was the chief challenge to educational attainment, and the factor most likely to 
defaultdetrimentally impact 
defaultboth attainment and opportunity. One charity 
defaultCEO made the point that poor educational attainment amongst working class boys has been the norm for decades, but this has only recently been exposed by the
default better
default performance of 
defaultgirls, and certain ethnic minority groups. He pointed out that the gender gap
default in educational attainment reverses in the workplace, and dismisses talk of ‘a crisis of masculinity’ as a modern apologetic for poor educational outcomes which have been present for many years. 
defaultSome respondents also pointed out the higher school exclusio
defaultn rate amongst young black boys, 
defaultand commented that teachers were more likely to exclude black children for behaviour that would not result in exclusions for white children. 
defaultSome of our respondents pointed out that the challenges they identified were more
default keenly seen amongst white working class beneficiaries, but were not limited to them:
default“Young people from Asian backgrounds typically have much less chaotic home lives and their families encourage them to succeed in education. This is beginning to change th
defaultough, and we’re seeing 
default3
defaultrd
default generation English-
defaultAsian kids start to behave much more like their White working class counterparts” 
default- 
defaultSenior Manager at a charity providing youth centres in the North Westdefault“We do see a lot of ‘fatherlessness’ am
defaultongst our white i
defaultntake, but then
default we do amongst our Black British young people too. I feel the big divide is between ‘black an
defaultd white’ and ‘Asian’, due to 
defaultthe strong family background many of or Asian kids have.”
default 
default– 
defaultHead of Coaching for a charity working with NEETsdefaultThe role 
defaultof S
defaultpecial 
defaultE
defaultducational 
defaultN
defaulteeds
default and M
defaultental 
defaultH
defaultealth
defaultThe majority of respondents agreed that mental health problems were common amongst 
defaultall 
defaulttheir beneficiaries, with depression and anxiety the most so. Special educational needs 
default(SEN) 
defaultwere also a recurrent theme 
default– the charity working with young offenders recorded twice (34%) the incidence of statemented SEN amongst its white intake as amongst its BME intake. A practitioner at another organisation said that he felt there was a higher incidence of SEN amongst his wh
defaultite male clients, and that they experienced poorer diagnosis and poorer treatment than other groups. 
defaultOne senior manager working with NEETS commented that our school system prioritises attainment over engagement, which severely disadvantages and dis
default-
defaultincent
defaultivises children and young people with SEN. 
defaultHow to Engage Young People defaultThere were many 
defaultsimilarities
default amongst the successful methods o
defaultur charities use
default to engage disadvantaged children and young people, either in mainstream education, or in ‘second chance’ a
defaultctivities designed to move them into education, training, or employment. 
defaultPersistence was common to nearly all, but it is worth going into more detail here, as we feel the lessons are essential for those working with young people in schools, health services
default, and employment services. 
default“[The key is] quiet tenacity. We approach parents with a focus on their children’s ‘emotional wellbe
defaulting’ and not ‘mental health’. We
default expect a ‘does not attend’ rate of about four, with children and/or parents finally attending o
defaultn the fifth appointment. This is different from CAMHS which has a ‘no follow up’ policy if a young person doesn’t attend.  Our staff are well-supported to maintain their persistence and resilience.
default Staff need to be expert, nuanced, supportive, and not ‘cli
defaultnical’.
default”
default – 
defaultSenior Manager, charity providing counselling services in schoolsdefault“We use an arts-based programme, because you can’t ‘fail’ the arts”. Our intake have a history of educational failure and any success is a huge motivator. Our curriculum builds li
defaultteracy and numeracy by stealth, as well as confidence. Clients are called ‘students’, and when they graduate the course, this is celebrated with a ceremony attended by parents and local dignitaries. We’re also happy to spend money on cabs to get latecomers
default in in the morning – the cabbie
defaults
default we use are happy to hammer on the door to get them out of bed, because getting them into a rout
defaulti
defaultne is crucial. It’s a good use of money because nothing is a bigger waste of money than an empty seat on a course.”
default – 
defaultCEO of a defaultcharity working with young offendersdefault‘’We go to where young people are – and we make them an initial offer that’s engaging: ‘just come and play football’. We fit in with the people who are already making a difference in a community – we don’t compete with 
defaultthem. We assess the young people to make sure an intervention is right for them – we don’t want to set them up to fail, because 
defaultthat’s happened to them before.”
default – 
defaultCOO of a charity using street football as a hook to reengage NEETs in learning default“
defaultThe key is 
defaultto engage young people in a coaching relationship. Many organisations say they do coaching but all our staff are actually fully trained coaches. The adult to adult relationship between a coach and a young person is crucial – teachers simply aren’t able to
default 
defaulthave this kind of relationship
default with pupils. Our staff need to be char
defaultismatic, and good listeners – bu
defaultt not afraid to challenge apathy or hopelessness. We meet young people in Job Centres and try to get a phone number. Then we call them repeatedly and expec
defaultt lots of rejection – typically, it will take three or four chances to get them to e
defaultnrol.”
default – 
defaultHead of Coaching for a charity working with NEETsdefault“
defaultThe first few years at our Centres might just be about having fun, learning a few skills, and making new friends
default from outside the immediate neighbourhood. After a few years, maybe at 14, staff are trusted and can ask questions about how things are going at school. The White working class kids we see are not used to being asked these questions, or if they are, they’r
defaulte not responding positively. Our staff open their eyes to different responses and options. It may sound like slow progress, but we’ve got 20% of kids coming from workless hom
defaultes with very chaotic home lives”
default 
default– Senior Manager at a charity providing youth cendefaulttres in the North Westdefault“
defaultThe quality of our staff is key to successful engagement – selection is stringent and training ta
defaultkes three months. Staff build up a very personal relationship with young people and demonstrate a strong commitment to them. We say ‘if
default you join us at 7 we still want to be seeing you every week when you’re 14’. Where else can a child get this individual commitment
default?
default”
default – 
defaultManager at a charity offering homework defaultclubs and academic supportdefault“
defaultWe often hear that teachers treat the young people we 
defaultsee very negatively, and use a ‘shaming’ approach. They don’t treat them as equals. We have positive conversations with them about school and their aspirations for the future. One girl said that having a mentor – someone who cared – was really important to
default her. And without positive role models, kids may find negative ones – such as drug d
defaultealers.”
default 
default– 
defaultManager, charity providing interventions to keep at-risk teenagers engaged in educationdefault“One thing we offer is community. We give these young people a unique mom
defaultent of being in a group which goes through intense experiences where they are taken out of their comfort zone. They get new experiences, encouragement, inspiration, and they do it with their peers.’
default 
default– 
defaultHead of Coaching for a charity working with NEETsdefaultIt is
default easy to spot the 
defaultrecurring 
defaultthemes in these quotes. Again and again we see the importance of 
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultPersistence
default and resilience on the part of staff working with young people at risk of educational failure, or who need reengagement with education. This is contras
defaultted with the tendency of statutory services to withdraw support if it is turned down once. 
default&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultA one to one relationship 
default(often described as ‘mentoring’ or ‘coaching’) 
defaultbetween a young person and an adult who is prepared to commit to them. Again, respondents commented that schools, and other statutory services, are not set up to provide this kind of relationship, but that its essential for young people who are not getting
default this type of support at home. 
default&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultInvesting time in young people. No intervention can 
defaultwork overnight, or stop young people
default from having to go back to a chaotic home.
default Staff must be able to work with children and young people over an extended time, and not be forced to ‘move them on’ too soon. 
default&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultF
defaultinding ‘hooks’ that 
defaultdraw young people in, and then 
defaultlet 
defaultthem
default succeed when they are used to failing. 
defaultThese lessons deserve to 
defaultbe reflected on by schools, as well as by services such as CAMHS.
default CAMHS was described by one respondent, with extensive experience as ‘an intimidating service’ for young people. 
defaultWhat Needs To Change defaultMany of our portfolio felt that the education system wa
defaults simply not set up to support achievement
default for all young people, and that disadvantaged young people, in particular, bore the brunt of this. A common theme was that the link between educational attainment and future career success was not seen to exist by 
default(in particular) white working class pupils. 
default“White working class boys don’t 
defaultalways 
defaultsee a link between exams and the kind of employment they’re looking for
default – and 
defaultnot all schools equip
default white working class boys with the skills the
defaulty need to get, and keep, a j
defaultob.”
default – 
defaultSenior Manager, charity providing counselling services in schoolsdefault“The education system doesn’t cater for the career aspirations of many kids”
default 
default– 
defaultCEO, mentoring charity default“The white working class kids do not see education as the way out of their curre
defaultnt situation.”
default - 
defaultSenior Manager at a charity providing youth centres in the North Westdefault“Alumni networks are really underused – every school should have an alumni network, so that children and young people can see, and access, people from backgrounds like t
defaultheirs who have succeeded.”
default default- defaultManager at a charity offering homework defaultclubs and academic supportdefault“Role models from the local community – people who’ve succeeded in employment - should be working alongside teachers, and expanding young people’s exposure to 
defaultwider opportunities.”
default - 
defaultCEO, mentoring charity defaultCharities also felt that conventional methods of teaching were unlikely to work for the children and young people they worked with:
default“The trouble is, the school curriculum assumes engagement and a desire to le
defaultarn – what happen
defaults
default to children who aren’t engaged for whatever reason? Coaching would be a more effective method of teaching that guarantees engagement – it’s suitable for all abilities, and can make any subject relevant.” 
default– 
defaultHead of Coaching of a charity wdefaultorking with NEETs.default“
defaultThere are many different barriers, and so not just one model of learning will suit everyone. 
defaultHow can teachers get to know what inspires and motivates individual pupils, and then teach with that in mind? That’s what we do.”
default  – 
defaultManager atdefault a charity offering homework defaultclubs and academic supportdefault“Effort needs to be recognised. When young people do good they feel good, they feel better about themselves, and they are more likely to achieve. If they are not strong at maths, but they have learnt 
defaultto feel positive about how much effort they have put in, they will likely continue to put in effort, learn more, and achieve more.”
default - 
defaultManager, charity providing interventions to keep at-risk teenagers engaged in educationdefaultMany commented that schools often 
defaultweren’t alert to, or able to respond to, the problems in a child’s life outside of school, which could stop them achieving in school:
default‘What young people do outside of school is as important as what they do in school. Seven 
defaultnights’
default 
defaulta 
defaultweek, weekends and holi
defaultdays, ki
defaultds are not in school – what’s on
default offer to them
default then is critical to their
default achievements in school. They need to be challenged, they need to find ways of being successful, to mix with people from outside their immediate 
defaultneighbourhood, form relationshi
defaultp
defaults with good adult role models. We need to invest in opp
defaultortunities for young people to 
defaultget stability, order, and fun into their leisure time.”
default - 
defaultSenior Manager at a charity providing youth centres in the North Westdefault“
defaultChi
defaultldren can hide in large schools”
default 
default- 
defaultMadefaultnager, charity providing interventions to keep at-risk teenagers engaged in educationdefault“We see massive truancy in our intake – one boy came to us at 16 who had been to secondary school on just two occasions.’ 
default– 
defaultCEO of a charity working with young offendersdefault“
defaultPolicymakers and teachers
default need a better understan
defaultding 
defaultof the different barriers different groups face. When we train our volunteers we ask them to imagine themselves as a white working class boy, a Black British boy, and a Muslim teenage girl. It helps th
defaultem understand the different stereotypes those groups face, and how they get in the way of learning.” 
default– 
defaultManager at a charity offering homework defaultclubs and academic supportdefault“The school system is not attuned to the realities of white working class lives, 
defaultparticularly the most disadvantaged. Qualifications are not the whole story – we must pay attention to what is happening at the fringes of young people’s lives.”
default default- COO of a charity using street football as a hook to reengage NEETs in learning default“Teachers as
defaultsumptions and expectations about what a child is capable of are often based on the
defaultir
default background, and are still far too influential on a child’s achievements at school.”
default 
default– 
defaultCEO of a charity working with young offendersdefaultMany respondents expressed a strong des
defaultire for a system which genuinely had academ
defaultic aspirations for all children, as well as high-quality vocational pathways and options. 
defaultBut most were wary that a resurgence in talk of ‘improved vocational options’ would actually result in low-quality, second-
defaultchoice options that served as somewhere to ‘dump’ white working class students who were not expected to achieve. 
defaultSeveral commented on the lack of careers guidance on offer in schools now, as well as the loss of the Connexions service. 
defaultOne comment reflecte
defaultd that schools don’t necessarily recognise, or value, the work experience that white working class boys might get outside of school:
default“
defaultIt’s really common that white working class boys help their dads out with work in the summer – and sometimes in term time
default 
defaulttoo
default. This type of work experience can be a really good thing – but do schools recognise it, and count it alongside ‘going to work in an office’?”
default default- COO of a charity using street football as a hook to reengage NEETs in learning defaultThe Importance of Data defaultA crucial part of what we work with our portfolio organisations to achieve is called ‘impact management’. That is to say, the practice of measuring key indicators 
defaultin real-time 
defaultduring your work, and using the results to influence your practice, and resourci
defaultng, on a daily, weekly, and annual basis. There is substantial evidence to show that not only does this drive improved performance at an organisation level but it also 
defaultimproves outcomes for individual beneficiaries. 
defaultWe asked our organisations to tell us h
defaultow they used impact management, and real-time monitoring, in their practice, and to ensure they were doing a good job for children and young people. The methods varied, but there were similarities. 
default“Attendance of a young person is logged every week, and t
defaulthey are phoned if they don’t attend.”
default 
default– 
defaultManager at a charity offering homework defaultclubs and academic supportdefault“Continuous monitoring – adult to adult reflection and review – is part of the coaching process/culture. We know how every young person is doing at ev
defaultery stage of their time with us” - 
default– 
defaultHead of Coaching for a charity working with NEETsdefault“
defaultStaff receive their clinic
defaultal supervision on the same 
defaultday they see their clients [children and young people]. 
defaultThis means they’re 
defaultreporting
default on a child’s progress the same
default day they see them, and making plans for next steps”
default default- defaultSenior Manager, charity providing counselling services in schoolsdefault“Real-time monitoring of staff performance is routine – if any of the teams are submitting sub- standard results, they have to submit an improvement plan which is independently audited, and a site visit is carried out” 
default– 
defaultCEO of a charity working with youngdefault offendersdefault“Our use of data is formative and summative
default. Students have routine 1:1s with a Progression Coordinator, and their performance on the course is monitored. They, and we, need to know if there are any areas where they might be likely to fail, so it
default can be addressed.” - 
defaultCOO of a charity using street football as a hook to reengage NEETs in learning defaultThere is evidence that impact-led use of data is key in improving educational attainment in schools, including those with disadvantaged intakes. Our organ
defaultisations – some of the best-performing in the UK – are using data to ensure they know whether the children and young people 
defaultthey work with 
defaultare improving and benefitting. They use this feedback to put in place remedial plans if they are not. 
defaultIt is crucial 
defaultfor all schools to identify and track the right data. From the day a child enters school, staff should be able to see whether they are making academic progress, and be empowered to act quickly if they are not. Good GCSE results for the majority in a school
default are not acceptable, if a rump of pupils are allowed to underachieve, disrupt lessons, or simply not attend. 
defaultAs one of our respondents said, children can ‘hide’ in large schools. They cannot if a school is committed to tracking the progress of every child
default, and focussing attention, and resource, on those who need it. Tackling a child’s problems – whether academic, or in his wider life -  at 12 is more effective on every level than waiting until they are 16, and months away from failing to secure a single go
defaultod GSCE. 
defaultConclusionsdefaultWe would be delighted to talk w
defaultith the Education Select Committee about this res
defaultponse, the eleven interviews 
defaultconducted and the ongoing work of Impetus – The Private Equity Foundation.  We welcome the committee’s desire to better understand the challenges faced by white working class boy
defaults in the UK
default education system
default.  We hope that hearing from an engaged philanthropic funder and the voices of many expert practitioners working in and outside of school
default,
default is a useful contribution to the committees understanding of how 
defaultcollaboratively 
defaultwe 
defaultcan 
defaultwo
defaultrk towards an education system where every pupil, regardless of background is supported to succeed and transition successfully into the adult world of work and 
defaultbecome an active and engaged member of society.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultAppendixdefaultThe organisations that took part in our
default consultation to inform this response were
default (ADD IN a couple of lines on which each does and their website) 
default 
defaultCity Yeardefault - 
defaulthttp://www.cityyear.org.uk/
defaultCity Year recruits 18-to-25-year-olds for 11 months of full-tim
defaulte volunteering as near-peer role models, mentors and tutors in schools in deprived areas. This simple act of ‘giving back’ through a volunteer service year has a triple impact.
default&#xa0;defaultGreenhousedefault - 
defaulthttp://www.greenhousecharity.org/
default&#xa0;
defaultGreenhouse empowers young people in London’s most disadvantaged communities to realise their potential through high quality, intensive sport and performing arts programmes delivered by inspirational coaches.
defaultIntoUnivedefaultrsitydefault - 
defaulthttp://www.intouniversity.org/
defaultIntoUniversity provides local learning centres where young 
defaultpeople are inspired to achieve.
defaultOnsidedefault - 
defaulthttp://www.onsidenorthwes
defaultt.org/
defaultOnSide North West is a charity with one simple aim to build a network of 21st Century Youth Centres across the North West, giving young people quality, safe and affordable places to go in their leisure time.
defaultPlace2BEdefault - 
defaulthttp://www.place2be.org.uk/
defaultPlace2Be is the leading UK provider of school-based counselling services, working in 200 schools, and reaching 75,000 children, their parents and carers. Whether they are facing bereavement, family breakdown, do
defaultmestic violence, trauma, or bullying, Place2Be helps children to grow up with prospects rather than problems. For further information please visit: 
defaultwww.place2be.org.uk
default 
defaultResurgodefault default-
default 
defaulthttp://resurgo.org.uk/
defaultResurgo's initiatives
default&#xa0;
defaultSpear and SpearHead
default&#xa0;
defaultprovide coaching services to create sustainable employment for disadvantaged young people
default.
defaultStreet Leaguedefault - defaulth
defaultttp://www.streetleague.co.uk/
defaultStreet League specialises in changing the lives of disadvantaged young people through the power of football. 
defaultTeens &amp; Toddlersdefault - defaulthttp://www.teensandtoddlers.org/
defaultTeens &amp; Todd
defaultlers delivers an innovative, and evidence based, programme which 
defaultfosters through intensive interaction with small children and classroom time, greater self-aspiration and hope for the future, as well as educational attainment.
defaultThinkForwarddefault - defaulthttp://impetus-pef.org.uk/portfolio-type/thinkforward/
defaultThinkForward is a breakthrough early intervention programme which works with vulnerable 14-to-19 year olds to dramatically reduce their chances 
defaultof becoming NEET (not in education, employment or training)
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultUnitasdefault - defaulthttp://www.unitas.uk.net/
defaultUnitas is a national charity that helps young people, including serious and persistent offenders, 
defaultaccess, participate and 
defaultprogress in mainstream education and training
defaultWorking Ritedefault - defaulthttp://www.workingrite.co.uk/
defaultThe Working Rite program is a full-time placement for a young person lasting up to six months w
defaultith local small-to-medium sized employers. 
default