&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultScottish Women’s Aiddefault&#xa0;default1.0 Introductiondefault1.1 
defaultScottish Women’s Aid
default 
defaultis the 
defaultlead organisation in Scotland working towards the prevention of domestic abuse. 
defaultWe 
defaultrepresent the collective voice of our 36 member groups 
defaultwho
default provide refuge accommodation and 
defaulta range
default of support services to women, children and young people 
defaultescaping
default domestic abuse. Scottish Women’s 
defaultAid 
defaultcampai
defaultgns
default to 
defaultstop domestic abuse; improve the
default protection and provision of services for women and children experiencing domestic abuse
default and provides evidence and ‘
defaultexpert
default view’
default input to 
defaultthe 
defaultgovernment 
defaultand policy makers 
defaultat
default a national and local level.
defaultWe welcome the opportunity to provide evidence to the Work and Pensions 
defaultSelect Committee I
defaultnquiry into the provision of support to meet housing costs in 
defaultthe 
defaultreformed welfare system. 
default2. SummarydefaultWomen’s Aid in Scotland supports t
defaulthousands of women and children 
defaultevery year
default, 
defaultwith 
defaultover 500 women 
defaulta week making contact with Women’s Aid for the first time for support, refuge accommodation, information or advice. Vulnerable women and children
default 
defaultacross Scotland face growing difficulties acces
defaultsing and sustaining the support and hosing they need due to the cumulative impact of welfare reform. Our members are reporting concerns about the following aspects of welfare reform which particularly impact upon women and children 
defaulttrying to escape
default domesti
defaultc abuse:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default3. 0 The Impact of changes to the way costsdefault for housingdefault defaultare dealt with under welfare reformdefault3.1 
defaultScottish 
defaultWomen’s Aid welcomed the an
defaultnouncement by Ministers to the C
defaultommittee in September 2012 that ‘exempt accommodation’ would be dealt with outside of Universal Credit and
default would be
default part of a localised system in the longer term
default. 
default3.2 
defaultHowever, n
defaultot
default all supported accommodation qualifies as ‘supported exempt accommodation’ (SEA). The definition of SEA, excludes supported accommodation owned by a local authority. It also only applies if s
defaultupport is provided on behalf of the landlord, current commissioning practice is for local authorities (as funders) to procure support services directly from the support provider, the landlord (an RSL) is not
default normally 
defaultinvolved in this process.
default&#xa0;
default3.3 
defaultIn April 2013, Lord Freud, Minister for Welfare Reform, wrote to 
defaultScottish 
defaultWomen’s Aid stating that the Government intends to protect supported housing such as refuge accommodation from Universal Credit changes and will be developing solutions to this. 
defaultWhi
defaultle we welcome this decision we are still awaiting details 
defaultof
default the interim solution, 
defaultwhich is likely to include a 
defaultrevision of the SEA definition
default,
default 
defaultbut
default remain
default apprehensive
default that a revised definition will continue to exclude local authority owned supported accom
defaultmodation.
default&#xa0;
default3.4
default In the 
defaultlonger term 
defaultthe 
defaultlikelihood 
defaultis 
defaultthat a new system will devolve funding to the Scottish Government.
default We are concerned about the impact of this on the future financial stability of refuge accommodation:
defaultcurrent cost
defaults
default of supported housing.
default&#xa0;
default3
default.
default5
default 
defaultIn Scotland a
defaultlmost a third of refuge accommodation 
defaultis owned by local authorities and does not qualify as exempt. 
defaultThe majority of local authorities have continued to exempt this accommodation from the under occupation 
defaultcharge for this financial year
default,
default while 
defaultthey await
default the outcome of the DWP’s consultation on housing benefit and supported accommodation. 
defaultIn some areas, h
defaulto
defaultwever
default,
default there has
default already
default be
defaulten an impact on refuge services, for example;
default3.6
default The 
default‘bedroom tax’ is severely limiting the options for women moving on from refuge due to the lack of availability of one bedroom accommodation. In one area women in 
defaultrefuge have been told that the waiting list for one bedroom properties is 3 years. 
defaultThe delay i
defaultn women moving on from refuge means services struggle to accommodate women and children at the point of crisis.  Many Women’s Aid services report having to operate waiting lists and this inability to offer safe accommodation when it is needed
default greatly
default incre
defaultases the risk to women and children.
default3.7 
defaultRefuge services in Scotland are already unable to meet demand; our annual census day survey found that 
default2 out of 3 women were unable to get a refuge space for themselves and their children because of the lack of safe
default or suitable space
default. 
defaultWhere women are not able to access refuge accommodation for themselves of their children when they need to they may be at risk of returning t
defaulto abusive partners or forced to
default accept unsuitable bed and breakfast accommodation through a lo
defaultcal authority which no longer has access to appropriate temporary self-contained accommodation.
default3.8
default 
defaultWe are
default 
defaultvery 
defaultconcerned that women may be prevented from leaving an abusive partner because they fear they will be unable to pay for alternative accommodation
default. 
defaultIn one area a
default Women’s Aid service has reported 
defaulta woma
defaultn returning to 
defaulther
default abusive partner after being offered 
defaulta two bedroom flat
default by the local authority
default, as she feared not being able to pay 
defaultthe ‘bedroom tax’
default and getting into debt
default.
default 
default4default.default0default defaultPressure on Women’s Aid services as a result of defaultwelfare reforms default4
default.1 
defaultWomen’s Aid 
defaultservices in Scotland 
defaultare reporting women presenting for support with
default increasingly complex problems, 
defaultrequiring support to deal with 
defaultonline 
defaultbenefit claims, appeals
default, sanctions, d
defaultebt
default and housing issues arising from the 
default‘bedroom tax’
default.
default 
defaultOur members
default reported a 70% increase in demand for their services in the last year
default;
default that they are struggling to meet. We are concerned that the essential support services Women’s Aid provides to help women and children recover and rebuild their lives is being diverted into responding to urgent welfare benefit issues resulting from recent
default reforms.
defaultIt is essential that 
defaultalongside the introduction of sweeping changes to the welfare benefits system the Government provides sufficient and accessible advice services
default to respond to the needs of vulnerable people affected by these reforms. At presen
defaultt it is the severely overstretched voluntary sector that is being relied on to meet that need.
default5.0 Increased poverty default5.1 
defaultWomen’s Aid workers are working with an increasing number of w
defaultomen c
defaultoming to them who have no money;
default this is due to 
defaultthe length of time
default claims are taking to process, 
defaultESA appeals and 
defaultbenefit sanctions
default. These sanctions are at times the result
default 
defaultof
default DWP st
defaultaff being 
defaultun
defaultaware of the JSA D
defaultomestic Violence Easement
default, which exempts victims of domestic abuse f
defaultro
defaultm job seeking conditions and requirements
default for up to 13 weeks.  Recent research by the DWP found low levels of awareness or promotion of the 
defaultexemption 
defaultin Job Centre offices.
default 
defaultWhere possible Women’s Aid services will provide small 
defaultemergency 
defaultloans 
defaultbut have very limited resources to do this with and 
defaultare aware that these are unlikely to be 
defaultrecovered. 
defaultWe are 
defaultalso 
defaultaware that women in these situations are being increasingly advised to go to food banks, in rural areas of Scotland many women lack the means to travel to food banks
default.
defaultWomen experiencing domestic abuse face considerable barriers in trying to leave an abusive partner, access to refuge at the point they make that decision is crucial, as is the possibility of finding and 
defaultaffording a home at a future date. The current reform
defaults to the benefits system are impacting adversely on women’s ability to access refuge and move onto to rebuild their lives.
defaultScottish Women’s Aid is continuing to call on the Government to ensure that
default all
default refuge services are 
defaulttreated as 
defaultexempt 
defaultsupported accom
defaultmodation.
default27 September 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.scottishwomensaid.org.uk/sites/default/files/SWA%20Census%20Leaflet%202012%20v2.pdf
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/208123/rrep843.pdf
default