Written evidence submitted by the Refugee Children’s Consortium (RCC) (LAI 0054)default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefault&#xa0;default1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Refugee Children’s Consortium (RCC) is a group of 
defaultNGOs working collaboratively to 
defaultensure that the rights and needs of refugee children are
default promoted, respected and met in 
defaultaccordance with the relevant domestic, regional and
default international human rights and
default 
defaultwelfare standards.
default&#xa0;
default2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultRefugee and 
defaultmigrant
default children are children first and foremost and mu
defaultst be 
defaultafforded the same rights and protection as any other child
defaultren in the UK. Article 2 of the 
defaultUN Convention on the Rights of the Child 
default(UNCRC) 
defaultclearly st
defaultates that the rights within the 
defaultConvention should be respected for all children within the state party’s juri
defaultsdiction, 
default‘
defaultwithout discrimination of any kind, irrespective of the child’s or his or her parent’s or legal
default 
defaultguardian’s race, colour, sex, language, 
defaultreligion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic
default 
defaultor social origin, property, disability, birth or other status’.
default&#xa0;
default3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Convention also states that the best interests
default of the child must be a primary 
defaultconsideration (Article 3)
default and that States Parties must affor
defaultd children the right to express 
defaulttheir views in all matters affecting them – including in judicial an
defaultd administrative 
defaultproceedings (Article 12).
default&#xa0;
default4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultRefugee, asylum-seeking and migrant children may often be
default particularly vulne
defaultrable and in 
defaultneed of specific protection and assistance. This is es
defaultpecially the case when they are 
defaultseparated and without their families. In recognition of this, the UN Committee on the
default 
defaultRights of the Child’s 
defaultGeneral Comment No. 6 on Treatment of Unaccompani
defaulted and
default 
defaultSeparated Children Outside their Country of Origin 
default(2005)
default states that where children are 
defaultinvolved in administrative or judicial proceedings the
defaulty should be provided with legal 
defaultrepresentation.
default&#xa0;
default5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe need for legal representation for children has also
default 
defaultbeen emphasised by the Council 
defaultof Europe. The Committee of Ministers of the Council of Eur
defaultope guidelines on child
default-
defaultfriendly 
defaultjustice s
defaulttate that
default:
default3.7 Children should have the right to their own legal counsel and representation, intheir own name, in 
defaultproceedings where there is, or could be, a conflict of interest
default 
defaultbetween the child and the parents or other involved parties.
default3.8 Children should have access to free legal aid, under the same or more lenient
default 
defaultconditions as adults.
default&#xa0;
default6.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn the wake of already 
defaultenormous cuts to civil legal aid brought about by the Legal Aid,
default 
defaultSentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012 (LASPO),
default 
defaultwhich in the experience of 
defaultRCC members are having a significant detrimental impact on 
defaultthis group
default of children
default and their ability to exe
defaultrcise their rights, the RCC is extremely concerned about the potential impact th
defaulte current proposals would have 
defaulton refugee and migrant children, young people and their families. In particular, the Consortium is concerned about the proposed introduction of a
default ‘residence test’ for civil legal aid and changes to
default legal aid for judicial review, which 
defaultthreaten access to justice for thousands of children, young people and families. The RCC is concerned about the effects that the proposed residence test would have in
defaultpreventing refugee and migrant children and families accessing legal aid in those areas of law where legal aid still exists currently after LASPO, such as public law, community care, special educational needs, homelessness and public, and certain private, 
defaultlaw family proceedings.
default&#xa0;
default7.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultRCC members work with thousands of refugee and migrant children each year, both children who are sep
defaultarated and children in families, and see the frequency with which these children’s rights are violated in practice. 
defaultMembers of the 
defaultconsortiu
defaultm have considerable expertise in
default supporting this group and offering a range of support, advice, advocacy and other services to them. RCC members try to resolve the issues faced by these children and families, preferring to find means of resolving 
defaultproblems that do not involve litigation wherever possible. However, from our years of experience of working with this group we know that legal representation is crucial if these children are to be able to realise their rights and solve the problems they fa
defaultce. In many 
defaultsituations legal representation is the only possible means of resolving the problem. Members of RCC who are not lawyers cannot lawfully provide advice on a child or family’s immigration issues (section 84, Immigration and Asylum Act 1999), nor 
defaultdo RCC members who are not lawyers have the necessary expertise to do so. Similarly in other areas of law such as community care or public law, 
defaultthe
default work that RCC members do relies on being able to refer to legal aid solicitors and we are extremely concerne
defaultd by the threat to legal aid provision, which in turn threatens our work, our ability to assist our clients, and could place a huge burden on scarce voluntary sector resources.
default&#xa0;
defaultLack of defaulta defaultchild impact assessmentdefault&#xa0;default8.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultT
defaulthe government appears to have undertaken 
defaultno child impact assessment whatsoever in relation to these proposals
default, which risk effectively cutting children off from access to justice.
default 
defaultThe government claims that the impact on children has been considered
default.
default 
defaultHowever, this is not evident in the vari
defaultous do
defaultcuments,
default n
defaultone of
default which mentions the 
defaultbest interests of children.
default&#xa0;
default9.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe government has an obligation, under the 
defaultUNCRC
default to ‘undertake all appropriate legislative, administrative, and other measures for the
default 
defaultimplementation of
default 
defaultthe rights
default’ contained in the 
defaultConvention,
default 
defaultand
default to ensure that, in all actions 
defaultconcerning children, their best interests shall be a primary 
defaultconsideration. This fundamental 
defaultprinciple applies whether the actions are taken by ‘public or private
default social welfare 
defaultinstitutions, courts of law, a
defaultdministrative autho
defaultrities or legislative bodies’.
default This extends to 
defaultthe formation of government policy and legislation, and, a
defaultccording to the UN Committee on 
defaultthe Rights of the Child, child impact assessments are key to 
defaultfulfilling this obligation. The 
defaultCommit
defaulttee stated, in its
default General Comment on ‘genera
defaultl
default 
defaultmeasures of
default 
defaultimplementation’
default 
defaultthat:
defaultEnsuring that the best interests of the child are a primary consideration in all actions concerning children (art. 3(1)), and that all the provisions of the Convention are 
defaultrespected in legislation and policy development and delivery at all levels of government demands a continuous process of child impact assessment (predicting the impact of any proposed law, policy or budgetary allocation which affects children and the enjoy
defaultment of theirrights) and child impact evaluation (evaluating the actual
default 
defaultim
defaultpact of implementation). This process needs to 
defaultbe built into government at all 
defaultlevels and as early as possible
default in the development of policy.
default&#xa0;
default10.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWe believe the impact assessment 
defaultundertaken by the government in relation to these proposals is wholly inadequate. In relation to the residence test, the impact assessment
default states that non-British nationals will be at a particular disadvantaged compared with British nationals. It is the R
defaultCC’s view that this is discriminatory under domestic and international human rights legislation. Article 2 
defaultof the UNCRC makes clear that 
defaultthat there should be no discrimination between children on the basis of their nationality, ethnicity, social status or 
defaultother status, 
defaultor the status of their parents, a provision
default reiterated in government guidance 
defaultwhich states that ‘
defaulte
defaultvery child matters even if they are someone subject to immigration control
default’
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe residence testdefault&#xa0;default11.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWhile the RCC 
defaultwelcomes the concessions made in the government’s paper 
defaultLegal Aid Transformation: Next step
defaults published on 5th September 2013, which 
defaultrespond
default to some of the concerns we raised in our response to the 
defaultTransforming legal aid
default 
defaultconsultation in June 2013,
default 
defaultwe firmly believe that 
defaultthese proposals are 
defaultstill 
defaultinconsistent with the government
default’s 
defaultcommitments to protecting all children’s welfare, best interests and rights as set out under domestic and international legislation – regardless of their or their parents’ 
defaultstatus or nationality. 
default&#xa0;
default12.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe government appears to have been persuaded that some groups are vulnerable, but has only carved out very discrete areas in which they will still be eligible for civil legal aid, leaving in question their commitment to really pro
defaulttecting these groups and their access to justice.
default&#xa0;
default13.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe Refugee Children’s Consortium strongly opposes proposals for limiting legal aid through a requirement that an applicant for legal aid is ‘lawfully resident’ in the
default 
defaultUK at the time of applying for civil 
defaultlegal aid and a requirement that the applicant has resided lawfully in the UK for 12 months. We also disagree with the rational
defaulte
default behind the proposal, which is that it will ensure that only those with a ‘strong connection to the 
defaultUK’ are able to benefit from
default the civil legal aid scheme. Many of the children with whom we work have a very strong connection to the UK. For some it is the only place they have ever lived, or the only one
default 
defaultthat they can remember. 
defaultFor example, there are an estimated 120,000 undocumente
defaultd migrant children in the UK, over half of which (65,000) were born in the UK to undocumented migrant parents
default and
default will fall foul of the residence test, as a
default child born in the UK does not automatically
default acquire British citizenship if
default their parent/s are not British. 
defaultIn addition, many undocumented children are brought into the UK by a parent 
defaultor guardian, or through a private fostering arrangement. Some come to the UK lawfully when they
default are very young with a parent or other relative and 
defaultgrow up here, unwittingly staying beyond the period when their visas or leave were valid. 
defaultIn some cases family relationships break down, leaving children abandoned and left to be taken into the care system.
default&#xa0;
default14.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWhere unlawful decisions are made there will be 
defaultchildren who have meritorious claims and who have a right in law to challenge the decision but who will effectively be without any remedy because they will be unable to access legal advice or representation to challenge these decisions because they cannot 
defaultpay for it and because legal aid will be denied to them. This will have a significant effect on refugee and migrant children and families, many of whom rely on legal support to ensure that they are able to access the support from local authorities to which
default they are entitled and to ensure that they are able to challenge unlawful decisions made about their cases – decisions which determine their futures.
default Examples of the groups affected include:
default&#xa0;
defaultDestitute children and families 
default&#xa0;
default15.
default&#xa0; 
defaultDestitute children who are con
defaultsidered to be
default in the UK unlawfully (because, 
defaultfor example, their family’s asylum claim has been refus
defaulted, or they are the chil
defaultdren of 
defaultoverstayers) are already from 1 April 2013 no longe
defaultr able to get legal aid for any 
defaultimmigration (non-asylum) application they
default might be able 
defaultto make, including one based on 
defaultthe right to respect for private and family life (under Artic
defaultle 8 of the European Convention 
defaulton Human Rights) and their best interests. The new propos
defaultals will take away their access 
defaultto civil legal aid entirely
default. So for example, if a local authori
defaultty acts unlawfully and does not 
defaultcomply with its duties to the children under section 17 of th
defaulte Children Act 1989, the family 
defaultwill not be able to access legal aid for a community 
defaultcare solicitor. Judicial review 
defaultproceedings in these cases are a key safeguard in ensuring
default a local authority does not act 
defaultin breach of the law by unlawfully refusing support and for
defaultcing a family into destitution, 
defaultbut they will have no access to legal aid to bring proceedi
defaultngs and are, in 
defaultour experience, 
defaultcompletely unable to bring such proceedings unaided. 
default&#xa0;
default16.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAnother extremely vulnerable group that would be hit by
default the proposed residence test is 
defaultseparated migrant children in local authority care. A significant number of c
defaulthildren with 
defaultno regul
defaultar immigration status may end up in the care of a
default local authority, for example a 
defaultchild who has long overstayed a visa through no fault o
defaultf their own and where a private 
defaultfostering arrangement has broken down or they have been the subject of careproceedings a
defaultfter suffering abuse or neglect. Some of thes
defaulte children will not be claiming 
defaultasylum so will not fall into the asylum-seeker excepti
defaulton. If the local authority acts 
defaultunlawfully and does not comply with its duties to the child (for exampl
defaulte, placing the child 
defaulti
defaultn unsuitable accommodation or undertaking an unla
defaultwful age assessment), the child 
defaultwould have no legal aid for a community care solicitor to
default challenge this treatment which 
defaultbreaches their rights. Also, the recent cuts to legal aid f
defaultor immigration claims mean 
defaultthat 
defaultunaccompanied children as well as care leavers rely on the local authority’
defaults duties 
defaulttowards them including a duty to pay for immigration legal services privately whe
defaultre this is 
defaultin their best interests. 
default&#xa0;
default17.
default&#xa0; 
defaultT
defaulthere has already been a 
defaultsignificant cost shift 
default(and overall cost increase to the government) as a result of looked after children being cut off from immigration legal aid under LASPO
default 2012.
default 
defaultIn the view of 
defaultthe Consortium, the government should urgently consider th
defaulte potential financial burden it 
defaultrisks put
defaultting onto local authorities if a residen
defaultce test were implemented. Local 
defaultauthorities, owing duties to looked after children, woul
defaultd have to pay for private legal 
defaultservices. Furthermore, if a local authority refuses to pay for 
defaultlegal aid in a particular case, 
defaultl
defaultegal aid will not be available to enforce this obligation.
default The No Recourse to Public Funds Network has estimateda cost burden of £26 million on 
defaultlocal authorities resulting from these proposals, due to the
defaultincreased homelessness and their duties to vulnerabl
defaulte children.
default&#xa0;
defaultChildren affected by detention 
default&#xa0;
default18.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe Ministry of Justice’s response to the Transforming Legal Aid Consultation states: 
default‘We have also concluded that there are further limited circumstances where applicants for civil legal aid on certain 
defaultmatters of law (as set out in Schedule 1 to LASPO) would not be required to meet the residence test. The test will not apply to the following categories of case (which broadly relate to an individual’s liberty.....’
default 
default&#xa0;
default19.
default&#xa0; 
defaultDespite this concession, the Governme
defaultnt still proposes that the residence test will apply to 
defaultchallenges to the legality of detention which
default are brought
default in civil claims
default by immigration detainees after their release. 
defaultRCC members have dealt with many cases where children and parents have been deta
defaultined unlawfully. Civil claims are a crucial means to offering these individuals redress, and ensuring that the Home Office cannot detain children and parents unlawfully with impunity. 
default&#xa0;
default20.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIn 2010, a time limit of one week was introduced on the detention of 
defaultfamilies with children. Prior to this, RCC members referred very many families to solicitors who made civil claims challenging the legality of their detention. In one case a family was awarded £150,000.
default  Such cases were vital in holding the Home Office to account and precipitated very significant improvements in the treatment of this vulnerable group.   
default&#xa0;
default21.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe RCC is aware of two cases where the High Court has found that single mothers have been unlawfull
defaulty detained and separated from their children.
default Despite the unlawful practices highlighted by the High Court in those cases, many of the flaws which were revealed continued to be features of the cases set out in Bail for Immigration Detainee’s 2013 report ‘
defaultFractured Childhoods: the separation of families by immigration detention
default’. The RCC is aware of several recent cases where legal proceedings in civil claims to challenge the legality of parent’s detention were commenced but the Home Office paid thousands o
defaultf pounds in compensation prior to the case reaching trial. In one case which settled in early 2013 the parent and child were given £68,500 in compensation.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultCase study: Beth and Daniel default&#xa0;defaultBeth’s grandfather, who was caring for her and her disabled brother
default Daniel during their mother’s detention, became seriously ill and was admitted to hospital three times. Beth had to stop attending school to care for her brother and grandfather and missed her GCSE exams. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBeth found it extremely difficult to look after h
defaulter seven year old brother, was has limited motor control and severe behavioral problems. Children’s Services deemed Daniel to be at risk of emotional and physical harm, and found that: ‘Daniel has found it very difficult being separated from his mother…  [
defaultA] concerned neighbour rang to report that Daniel was playing alone in the road at 8pm... he walks into people’s houses.’  
default&#xa0;
defaultTwo months into his mother’s detention Daniel was hit by a car.  
defaultDespite receiving reports about the welfare of these children, the
default Home Office detained their mother for 160 days before she was released on bail by the Tribunal. The Home Office subsequently awarded the family 
defaulttens of 
defaultthousands of pounds in compensation for the mother’s detention. 
defaultUnder the proposed residence test, thisdefault mother would not have been able to access Legal Aid for her civil claim challenging the legality of her detention.default default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultCare leavers 
default&#xa0;
default22.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe proposals would also have a 
defaultsignificant impact on 
defaultcare leavers, including
default young 
defaultpeople
default who came to the UK as unaccompanied ch
defaultild
defaultren
default, who claimed asylum but 
defaultwere
default 
defaultrefused and became appeal rights exhausted. After turning 18 they woul
defaultd not be able to 
defaultget legal aid in order to challenge the local authority if t
defaulthey unlawfully withdrew support 
defaultan
defaultd made them destitute, an issue faced by many of
default the young people with whom RCC 
defaultmembers work.
default&#xa0;
defaultChildren whose ages are disputed 
default&#xa0;
default23.
default&#xa0; 
defaultA further group of cases of concern to RCC mem
defaultbers are children whose age is 
defaultdisputed. Many children in the immigration syste
defaultm ha
defaultve their ages disputed and some 
defaultare treated as adults, which can lead to their being held in
default immigration detention or being 
defaultdenied support.
default 
defaultThe correct assessment of an applicant who is under 18 years of age is necessary to ensure that the government 
defaultupholds its domestic and international obligations to those who are children. Where an applicant disagrees with the assessment made by a local authority, a judicial review of the decision, and the court's determination of age binds both parties. 
default&#xa0;
default24.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThese 
defaultchildren would only be able to get
default legal aid for a community care 
defaultsolicitor to challenge an unlawful age assessment if th
defaultey have an ongoing asylum claim 
defaultat the time the application for legal aid is made. For so
defaultme, claiming asylum will not be 
defaultthe appropriat
defaulte course for their immigration case. For o
defaultthers, the age dispute may only 
defaultarise once they no longer fall within the asylum-seeker
default exception, either because they 
defaulthave been recognised as a refugee, or granted anoth
defaulter form of leave to remain, and 
defaultthen have to
default wait 
defaultto accrue the necessary
default 12 months
default residence
default (this issue
default is explore below at paragraph 29
default)
default, or because they have
default been refused and have become a 
defaultfailed asylum-seeker (the process of assessing age wi
defaultthin a local authority can take 
defaultmany months). RCC memb
defaulters work with many chi
defaultldren whose ages are unlawfully 
defaultassessed
default, including children who are detained in adult institutions as a result,
default and is extremely concerned that the prop
defaultosals risk taking away the only 
defaulteffective remedy from those who do not meet the r
defaultequire
defaultments of the residence test (we 
defaultare also concerned about the effects of the proposals on judicial review more generally –
default 
defaultplease see below).
default&#xa0;
defaultSuspected victims of trafficking
default25.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWhilst the government has conceded that victims of trafficking should not be subjected to the residence test, 
defaultthis is limited to those for whom
default 
defaultthere has been a conclusive decision that the individual is a victim of trafficking or has been identified under
default the National Referral Mechanism (NRM) as having ‘reasonable grounds’ that they are victims of trafficking.
default This means that prior to an NRM referral and while awaiting the ‘reasonable grounds’ decision, a child victim of trafficking is not able to get leg
defaultally-aided advice or support from a solicitor unless the case also involves an asylum claim. 
default&#xa0;
default26.
default&#xa0; 
defaultRCC members and others have elsewhere expressed serious concerns about the National Referral Mechanism
default and 
defaulto
defaultver 65% of victims of trafficking are not referred t
defaulto the NRM
default,
default in part due to 
defaulta lack of awareness among frontline professionals of the existence of the NRM
default. When a referral is made
default, RCC members’
default recent research 
defaulthas shown 
defaultthat many children receive a negative decision
default because the exploitation element is difficult to prove despite there being evidence for illegal entry via an agent or trafficker
default.
default 
defaultThe assistance of a legal representative with
default compiling evidence and making representations to support their account of traf
defaultfi
defaultcking when referred to the NRM l
defaultowers the risk of a negative NRM decision. 
default&#xa0;
default27.
default&#xa0; 
defaultFurthermore, this concession would only mean that a victim of trafficking was able to obtain legal aid for an immigration applications, employment law case and civil damages cla
defaultim.
default The exemption therefore leaves very significant gaps in the civil legal aid that trafficking victims can access. They will not have access to civil legal aid in public law, leaving them unable to bring a judicial review. This is striking because the o
defaultnly way to challenge a negative reasonable or conclusive grounds decision is by judicial review. 
default&#xa0;
default28.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThey will also not be able to access legal aid in community care, for example if a child or young person is unlawfully denied services by a local authority o
defaultr unlawfully age disputed. This means that trafficked children will be in a powerless position where they are unable to challenge an incorrect age assessment and will therefore not be recognised as a child. This means they could remain homeless or be accom
defaultmodated inappropriately, supported insufficiently, and be placed at risk of harm, detention and 
defaultforced removal
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultCase study: JoydefaultJoy was trafficked into England from Nigeria when she was five-years-old, and kept 
defaultin domestic servitude
default for 10 years. She did
default not 
defaultknow her birth family, never went to school, was
default not 
defaultregistered with a GP and was given limited access to the outside world.
defaultAt the age of 16, Joy escaped and presented 
defaultto
default children’s services
default for support
default. However, the local authority disputed her age,
default as she did not have any documents to prove her date of birth, and assessed her to be over 18. The local authority took no steps to refer Joy’s case to the National Referral Mechanism, despite the clear indicators of trafficking. 
defaultJoy's case was taken on b
defaulty a solicitor who challenged both the age assessment and local authority’s failure to make a referral to the NRM. Her case was heard in the High Court which held that she had been 16 at the time of the age assessment. So, aged 18, she was given a firm fina
defaultncial footing with local authority funding, to help her find housing and study childcare at college.
default 
defaultUnder the proposed residence test, Joy would not have been able to access Legal Aid for the judicial review of her age assessment and to challenge the lodefaultcal authority’s refusal to support her. Despite being a victim of trafficking she would not have been covered by the government’s concession outlined above. default&#xa0;
defaultAsylum seekers and 
defaultthose with 
defaultrefugee status
default29.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe RCC
default welcome
defaults
default changes made to the government’s original proposals which mean the period of lawful residence will start from the date an asylum claim is submitted rather than the date it is accepted. However, we believe this approach to be counter-intuitive since childr
defaulten and young people with an overwhelming strong case for recognition as a refugee who are 
defaultgranted refugee status
default almost immediately would 
defaultstill 
defaultbe ineligible for legal aid for almost a year 
defaultsubsequent to
default being recognised as a refugee
default.
default The average processin
defaultg time for an initial asylum decision for a child in 2012-2013 was 127 days (or approximately 4 months)
default.
default Furthermore, it is no
defaultt clear whether this concession
default would apply to unaccompanied children who are refused asylum but granted discretionary or limited
default leave to remain (56% of unaccompanied children who claimed asylum in 2012 were granted discretionary leave).  
defaultJudicial reviewdefault&#xa0;default30.
default&#xa0; 
defaultJudicial review represents the practical application of the rule of law and someone who has suffered an unlawful act or omissio
defaultn by a public authority can bring a challenge by judicial review where there is no other remedy. As outlined above, JR is, for example, the only way to challenge an unlawful age assessment or an adverse decision on whether someone is a victim of traffickin
defaultg. 
defaultJudicial review is also a vital safeguard against the Home Office unlawfully removing children and parents from the UK
default, and maltreating children who are in immigration detention
default. 
defaultThe Government’s proposal that legal aid providers not be paid for work on
default judicial review cases unless permission is ultimately granted by the High Court would transfer all the financial risk of an application for judicial review to the legal aid provider, so that all the work they do on a JR is at risk. This will make provider
defaults far less willing to bring JRs and RCC members who are not lawyers are concerned that we will simply find no lawyers willing to take on the cases that we wish to refer to them because they cannot bear the financial risk. This will leave children with no w
defaultay to challenges unlawful treatment and undermine our efforts as voluntary sector organisations to support them.
default31.
default&#xa0; 
defaultJudicial review is a vital safeguard against public authorities acting unlawfully or where it is necessary to clarify the law. The impact assessment clearly identifies that there is a risk that providers may refuse to take on judicial review cases because 
defaultthe financial risk of the permission application may rest with them. We do not agree that these are cases that 
defaultwould not be considered by the court in any case. In fact we often find that cases settle before the permission stage in the child or family’s fa
defaultvour because the threat of legal action is sufficient for the authority or Home Office to change their unlawful practice. Without this vital safeguard, children and families will be unable to challenge unlawful decisions and actions by government. 
default&#xa0;
default32.
default&#xa0; 
defaultSuch 
defaultwas the level of concern about this proposal that a further consulta
defaulttion was launched in September alongside the proposal that 
defaultwhere a case has been issued 
default(but not otherwise),
default and settles without permission having been granted, the Legal Aid Agency may n
defaultevertheless pay the lawyers provided there is a good reason why the defendant has not been ordered to pay. This is however unlikely to address the central problem as public bodies faced with judicial reviews do not back down in the period between the issue
default of proceedings and the grant of permission. They tend to wait to see what the judge will do. Rather, public bodies tend to back down just before a case is issued and often whilst the substantial work preparing the case for issue is underway. All this work
default is vital and can be extremely time-consuming. Making it unfunded will seriously undermine the ability of individuals to hold the state to account.
default&#xa0;defaultAlternatives to legal aiddefault&#xa0;default33.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe Ministry of Justice’s Impact Assessment assumes that 
default‘individuals who no lon
defaultger receive legal aid will now adopt a range of approaches to resolve issues. They may choose to represent themselves in court, seek to resolve issues by themselves, pay for services which support self-resolution, pay for private representation or decide n
defaultot to tackle the issue at all.’
default 
defaultThe RCC believes that the children, young people and families it
default 
defaultworks with are unable to adopt alternative approaches that will resolve the issues they
default 
defaultface. In the RCC’s view, the clients we work with will simply be 
defaultunable to bring their cases
default 
defaultwithout legal aid, especially children. Nor should they be expected to do so. It is
default 
defaultcompletely unreasonable to expect children to navigate complex legal issues without
default 
defaultprofessional advice and representation and leaving children 
defaultwithout legal representation
default 
defaultis incompatible with the government’s obligations under the UN Convention on the Rights
default 
defaultof the Child. For children in care, the changes will simply result in significant costs to local
default 
defaultauthorities (forced to pay for private leg
defaultal services for looked after children, and
default 
defaultpotentially also care leavers and families supported under the Children Act 1989) and
default 
defaultsignificant costs to the court system, as judges are forced to deal with thousands of ill-prepared
default 
defaultlitigants in person.
default&#xa0;
default34.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIt is 
defaultalso clear that most children and families who have previously been able to apply for legal aid, many of whom will be dealing with legal issues around support and accommodation, will be unable to pay for private representation, and may be left at risk of a
defaultbuse and exploitation, including sexual abuse and exploitation, as they seek alternative means of funding legal services.
default&#xa0;
default35.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIt cannot be assumed that alternative sources of advice exist or will continue to exist, as the legal services landscape is changing 
defaultso dramatically due to government decisions. Many law centres and other not-for-profit organisations have already suffered significant cuts under LASPO, and it is not realistic to expect voluntary sector advice agencies or pro bono solicitors to offer alte
defaultrnative source of advice on many issues. The government’s changes threaten the very existence of legal providers, and undermine any sense of clarity about the future operating environment, so it is not at all clear who would be left to do any pro bono work
default. In any case, pro bono work is by its nature limited in terms of the amount of advice that can be offered and advice providers will not have capacity to meet clients’ needs, either in terms of the potential volume of people seeking help, or the specialist
default knowledge required for more complex cases.
default&#xa0;
default36.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAs stated at paragraph 
default7
default above, many RCC membe
defaultrs provide advocacy services to 
defaultyoung refugees and migrants, and while they can liaise with local authorities and others to try to ensure that appropriate support an
defaultd protection is provided, without recourse to 
defaultlegal action it is often impossible to force the relevant individual or agency to take action. A clear example of this is the high numbers of judicial reviews of unlawful local authority age assessments, where 
defaultit is not until a letter before action has been sent that the local authority will agree to treat the child as the age they claim to be. A significant number of these cases have to go to full hearing, and in many situations interim support will only be pro
defaultvided as a result of a court order.
default&#xa0;
default37.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe government has outlined that the proposed residence test would not result in contravention of our domestic and international legal obligations because ‘we would ensure that legal aid will continue to be available 
defaultwhere necessary to comply with our obligations under EU or international law set out in Schedule 1 to LASPO.’
default This is based on the supposed availability of exceptional funding as a safeguard for those excluded from legal aid by the residence test. However
default, it is the RCC’s belief that the exceptional funding system is not an adequate safeguard. To our knowledge, only nine grants of exceptional funding have been made since 1 April 2013 and it is inappropriate for children’s access to justice to be provided b
defaulty way of an ‘exception’
default&#xa0;
default38.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWhile the cost savings of restricting legal aid via a residence test are wholly unknown to the government, as stated in Impact Assessment MoJ194, the impact on children and those voluntary and statutory sector organisations support
defaulting them (including local authorities) will be hugely significant.
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusiondefault&#xa0;default39.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe proposed changes would result in a vast inequality of arms between the state and the individual subject to its power, an inequality that is all the more marked for children
default and young people, whose particular capabilities and vulnerabilities create distinct obstacles to their ability to seek redress and access justice. This is true of all children, due to their inherent vulnerability, lack of experience and enhanced advice ne
defaulteds,
default but it is particularly true of separated children and young people who are without their families and face complex administrative and legal proceedings alone, often in a language which is not their mother tongue and in a system which is utterly bewil
defaultdering to them. As is widely recognised, there are significant obstacles to these children being able to recognise legal problems, seek appropriate, quality legal advice and representation, and understand and navigate complex administrative and legal proce
defaultsses.
default 
default&#xa0;
default40.
default&#xa0; 
defaultChildren need legal representation if their rights are to be realised. The view of the RCC is that the proposed residence test is unlawful, breaching children’s rights as outlined above. Children who are not ‘lawfully resident’ or who have not resided lawf
defaultully in the UK for 12 months should not face discrimination and to deny them access to legal remedy is in breach of their rights. Any reforms to the civil legal aid system must take full account of their potential impact on all children, on children’s acce
defaultss to justice and an effective remedy, and on a child’s opportunity to be heard in administrative and judicial proceedings affecting them (Article 12, UN Convention on the Rights of the Child). 
default&#xa0;defaultThe RCC recommends that:default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultMembers of the Refugee Children's Consortium are: 
default&#xa0;
defaultAction for Children, Asphaleia Action, Asylum Aid, Association of Visitors to Immigration Detainees (AVID), Bail for Immigration Detainees, The British Association of Social Workers (BASW), Brighter Futures, British Association for Adoption and Fostering (
defaultBAAF), Catch22 National Care Advisory Service, Children and Families Across Borders (CFAB), Coram Children's Legal Centre, Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG), Children's Rights Alliance for England, The Children's Society, DOST, ECPAT UK, Family Rights Grou
defaultp, The Fostering Network, Family Service Units (FSU), Freedom from Torture, Gatwick Detainees, The Immigration Law Practitioners' Association (ILPA), Islington Law Centre, JCORE, Law Centres Network, Medical Justice, NCB, NSPCC, The Prince’s Trust, RAMFEL,
default Refugee Action, Refugee Council, Refugee Support Network, Royal College of Paediatrics and Child Health, Scottish Refugee Council, Student Action for Refugees (STAR), Voice, The Who Cares? Trust, and Welsh Refugee Council. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBarnardo’s, British Red Cross,
default Office of the Children’s Commissioner (England), UNICEF UK &amp; UNHCR all have observer status
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
defaultThis is a binding international obligation and it is translated into domestic law through se
defaultction 11 of the Children
default 
defaultAct 2004 and section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (see the leading Supreme Court
default 
defaultjudgment
defaultZH (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department 
default[2011] UKSC 4). Where Article 8 ECHR
default 
defaultrights are engaged,
default these are to be interpreted in accordance with the UNCRC.
defaultArticle 12 of the Convention provides:
default1. States Parties shall assure to the child who is capable of forming his or her own views the right to express
default 
defaultthose views freely in all matters affecting t
defaulthe child, the views of the child being given due weight in
default 
defaultaccordance with the age and maturity of the child.
default2. For this purpose, the child shall in particular be provided the opportunity to be heard in any judicial and
default 
defaultadministrative proceedings affectin
defaultg the child, either directly, or through a representative or an appropriate
default 
defaultbody, in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of national law’.
default 
defaultCRC/GC/2005/6 1 September 2005, para 36
default&#xa0;
defaultGuidelines of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Euro
defaultpe on child friendly justice, (adopted by the Committee of Ministers on the 17 November 2010 at the 1098th Meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies).
defaultAvailable at https://wcd.coe.int/wcd/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1705197&amp;Site=CM
defaultSee previous Refugee Children’s Consortium 
defaultbriefings on the impact of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and
defaultPunishment of Offenders Act 2012 at www.refugeechildrensconsortium.org.uk
default ‘
defaultWhile our analysis of equalities impacts is focussed on the protected characteristics set out in the Equality Act 2010, we have, throughout, considered carefully the impact of our proposals on vulnerable groups, with particular regard to the best interests
default of children, as addressed in the relevant chapters, the IAs and the equality statement’ , 
defaultTransforming Legal Aid: Next steps, Annex B: Response to consultation, para. 475
default 
defaultI
defaultncluding Annex F: Equality Statement and the Impact Assessments, particularly the
default Impact Assessment entitled 'Cumulative Legal Aid Reforms' and those with the IA numbers MoJ194, MoJ195 and MoJ198
default Article 4, UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989
default Article 3, UN Convention on the Rights of the Child 1989
defaultGeneral Comment No. 5,
default General measures of implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the Child (arts. 4, 42 and 44, para. 6) CRC/GC/2003/5 at paragraph 45.
default Annex K paragraph 5.3.1
defaulthttp://www.ukba.homeoffice.gov.uk/sitecontent/documents/policyandlaw/legislation/bci-act1/change-for-children.pdf?view=Binary
default Nando Sigona and Vanessa Hughes, 
defaultNo Way In, No Way Out: Irregular migrant
default children and families in the UK
default, COMPAS, University of Oxford, 2012
defaultNo Recourse to Public Funds Network, 
defaultShadow Impact Assessments for the Residence Test, 
defaultat http://www.nrpfnetwork.org.uk/policy/Pages/default.aspx
default Ministry of Justice September 2013 
defaultTra
defaultnsforming Legal Aid: Next steps
default Annex B: Response to consultation, Paragraph 125 
default 
defaultThe Independent 
default13/02/2009 ‘Asylum detainees win record payout’ 
defaulthttp://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/asylum-detainees-win-record-payout-1608207.html
default 
defaultMXL, R (on the application of) &amp; Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default [2010] EWHC 2397 (Admin) and 
defaultNXT, R (on the application of) &amp; Ors v Secret
defaultary of State for the Home Department
default [2011] EWHC 969 (Admin)
default This mother was a client of Bail for Immigration Detainees, who referred her to solicitors to challenge the legality of her detention.  
default Case study provided by Bail for Immigration Detainees 
default See The Children’s Society, 
defaultI don’t feel human: Experiences of destitution among young refugees and migrants
default, 2012, at 
defaulthtt
defaultp://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/files/tcs/research_docs/thechildrenssociety_idontfeelhuman_final.pdf
default and Refugee Children’s Consortium, 
defaultThe assessment and support of former unaccompanied asylum seeking children: Briefing June 2012
default, at 
defaulthttp://www.refugeechildrensconsortium.org.uk/images/rcc%20briefing
default%20on%20the%20assessment%20and%20support%20of%20former%20unaccompanied%20asylum%20seeking%20children_final.pdf
default default See Coram Children’s Legal Centre, 
defaultHappy Birthday? Disputing the age of children in the immigration system, 
default2013, at 
defaulthttp://www.childrenslegalcentre.com/index.php?page=happy_birthday
default? and Refugee Council, 
defaultNot a minor offence: Unaccompanied children locked up as part of the asylum system, 
default2012, at 
defaulthttp://www.refugeecouncil.org.uk/assets/0002/5945/Not_a_minor_offence_2012.pdf
default 
default As defined in paragraph 32 of Part 1 of Schedule 1 to LASPO
defaultSee, for example, Anti-Traffickin
defaultg Monitoring Group briefing 
defaultTrafficked children 
defaultat
defaulthttp://www.ecpat.org.uk/sites/default/files/atmg_briefing_trafficked_children.pdf
default  and Anti-Trafficking Mon
defaultitoring
defaultGroup briefing 
defaultDiscrimination in the identification process
default at
defaulthttp://www.ecpat.org.uk/sites/default/files/atmg_briefing_discrimination_in_the_identification_process.pdf
default 
default UK Human Trafficking Centre Annual Assessment (2013) 
defaulthttp:/
default/www.soca.gov.uk/news/608-human-trafficking-assessment-published
default CFAB written evidence to the Joint Committee on Human Rights – Inquiry into the human rights of unaccompanied migrant children and young people in the UK – 26 October 2012 - Children and
default Families Across Borders (CFAB) highlighted that having recently trained nearly 1000 frontline child protection staff in London, at the outset of training 75% had not heard of the NRM and 70% were unable to confidently identify trafficked children. 
default Refu
defaultgee Council and The Children’s Society, 
defaultStill at Risk: A review of support for trafficked children, 
default2013, at
defaultht
defaulttp://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/files/tcs/still_at_risk_-_full_report_-_refugee_council__the_childrens_society.pdf
default Paragraph 32, Part 1, Schedule 1, Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012
default Case study provided by Cor
defaultam Children’s Legal Centre 
default House of Commons - Written Answers 2
defaultnd
default July 2013 
defaultJudicial Review – proposals for further reform, 
defaultparagraph 119
default MoJ194 (paragraph 9)
defaultFor more information on these types of cases, see Coram Children’s Legal Centre, 
defaultHappy 
defaultBirthday? Disputing the age of children in the immigration system
default, 2013, at 
defaulthttp://www.childrenslegalcentre.com/userfiles/file/HappyBirthday_Final.pdf
default 
default Transformin
defaultg Legal Aid: Next steps, Annex B: Response to consultation, para. 11.2.7
default See, for example, Youth Access, 
defaultYoung People’s Access to Advice – The Evidence: Key Research Evidence
defaulton Young People’s Needs for Advice on Social Welfare Issues, 
default2009
default See, for ex
defaultample, Coram Children’s Legal Centre, 
defaultNavigating the System: Advice provision for young refugees
defaultand migrants, 
default2012, at 
defaulthttp://www.seekingsupport.co.uk/images/navigating_th
defaulte_system_final.pdf
default