Written evidence submitted by Mr John Ford (LAI 0057)default1. There is a serious misuse of statistics in the consultation paper.  There have been many complaints about this because the public have been misled.  Legal action 
defaultwas 
defaultcontemplated.  The 
defaultGovernment has not sought to make a defence to these criticisms.
default2.  For a document which claims to put forward proposals for saving money it is notewo
defaultr
defaultthy that  there is no suggestion as to how money or expenditure might be saved without a serious erosion
default of rights of access to the courts and an increased threat to the rule of law.
default3. Research evidence is already showing that the diminution of take up of legal aid which is still available despite LASPO is so significant that tens of millions at least will 
defaultbe saved irrespective of the proposed measures.  In my view this is principally due to
default(a) Politicians (including the Lord Chancellor) talking down the value of legal aid
default(b) Serious failure to advertise and promote legal aid
default(c)
default Potential users wrongly be
defaultlieving that even if L/A was available they would not be eligible.
default4
default.  The position of legal aid lawyers and their clients is not very different from that of the miners and their families in 1984.  They faced, as do we, a government determined to undermine
default and exclude the people who were opposed to its policies.  This proposal has nothing to do with perceived financial savings in a time of austerity.  It is a direct ideological challenge designed to make our society less equal.
default5
default. A well known 
defaultQC recently s
defaulttated at a public meeting:
default"If this ministry is worthy of its name and is fit for purpose....... then it must be persuaded to ditch these reprehensible proposals."
defaultI endorse those remarks.
default6. I respectfully refer to the impressive response prepared by Dr. 
defaultNick Armstrong and attach a copy for ease of reference.
default27 September 2013
default