&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultAs a campaigning organisation of blind and partially sighted people, we fight for the rights of people with sight loss in each of the 
defaultUK
default’s countries. Our priorities are to:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also provide expert knowledge to business and the public sector through consultancy on improving the accessibility of the bu
defaultilt environment, technology, products and services.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are pleased to have the opportunity to provide a submission to the work and pensions select committee in response to the call for evidence for the inquiry 
defaultinto s
defaultupport for housing costs in the reformed welfare system
default. Our submission will focus on the implications of the new social sector size criteria introduced by the Government 
defaultin April 2013 (also referred to 
defaultas “the Bedroom tax” or “Spare room subsidy”).
default&#xa0;
defaultOn 
default27 February
default 2013
default, Wayne David MP raised the issue of the social sector size criteria on behalf of his constituents during Prime Minister’s questions:
default&#xa0;
default“Mr and Mrs Goodwin live in the Caerphilly borough. They are both registered blind, and rely heavily defaulton their guide dogs, family and neighbours. Life is not easy for them, but from 1 April it will become even more difficult, because they will have to pay the Government’s bedroom tax on the home in which they have lived for 26 years. What justification candefault there be for that?”defaultWayne David MP, 27 February 2013default&#xa0;
defaultMr and Mrs Goodwin are not alone in facing 
defaultsignificant 
defaultincreased difficulties 
defaultinhibiting their independence 
defaultas 
defaulta result of the new size criteri
defaulta
default; many blind and partially sighted people have contacted 
defaultRNIB with deep concerns about the impact of the change, worried that they will be forced into debt or to move to an unfamiliar area where they end up isolated in their home
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Government have accepted that 63 per cent of those affected by the new socia
defaultl sector size criteria will be disabled
default;
default roughly
default 420,000 
defaultpeople. B
defaultlind and partially sighted people make up approximately 4% of all disabled people in the 
defaultUK
default, so 
defaultthe number of 
defaultblind and partially sighted people affected
default can be estimated at
default 17,000.
default&#xa0;
defaultRehabil
defaultitation training for a person with sight loss is designed to enable that person to live independently in their home and surrounding area and to travel safely to and from work. Being forced to move from that home 
defaultcan create the absurd situation where a pers
defaulton loses their sight, is provided with rehabilitation support, is forced to move property and area and subsequently requires all that training to be delivered again. It is an illogical 
defaultwaste
default of
default the financial and personal investment both by the individual a
defaultnd their local authority. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFurthermore it could cause unnecessary considerable stress and may mean some blind and partially sighted people are either unable to continue with their current jobs or will need to cl
defaultaim additional funding 
defaultthrough A
defaultccess to 
defaultW
defaultor
defaultk for taxi fares until they receive mobility training in their new area.
default&#xa0;
defaultN
defaultearly two thirds of people say that because of their sight loss they need help to get out of the house, a figure that
default 
defaultwill only increase with 
defaultfinancially enforced relocation
defaults as a r
defaultesult of the new size criteria
default. This in turn will place further strain on already overstretched social services.
default&#xa0;
default“If I had to move I’d face weeks in isolation, unable to step outside the front door because it’s too dangerous. It’s a long process to learn defaulta new area. I’d have to wait for a trained guide to teach me the roads.”defaultSiobhan, 29default&#xa0;
defaultThe new social sector size criteria risks pushing blind and partially sighted people over the tipping point to a 
defaultposition
default of 
defaultserious 
defaultmental, financial and physical hardsh
defaultip. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also urge the Work and Pensions 
defaultS
defaultelect 
defaultC
defaultommittee to take into account that blind and partially sighted people may rely on adaptations made to their house or an extra room 
defaultto store
default bulky assistive technologies in considering their recommendations for the future of this Government policy. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe recent case in 
defaultWestminster
default of blind housing association tenant 
defaultSurinder
default 
defaultLall
default demonstrates the im
defaultportance of the spare room for people with si
defaultght loss. Assistive technology is vital in maintaining independence both out and about and in the home. However, much of this equipment can be bulky and take up a significant amount of space, necessitating the use of another room for storage. It is unfair 
defaultfor anyone to be penalised for needing more space due to their disability, and we are pleased that the courts recognised 
defaultthis
default in Mr 
defaultLall’s
default case.
default&#xa0;
defaultAlthough we believe this policy is an unreasonable burden to place on a blind or partially sighted individual 
defaultfor the reasons outlined above, there is the added factor of the financial implications. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt has been estimated 
defaultfrom the Department of Work and Pensions (DWP) impact assessment that 
defaultdisabled people will lose an average of £728 per year on housing benefit
default.
default At a time when people with sight loss are twice as likely to live in households with an income of less than £300 a week compared to those with no impairment 
defaultand 
defaulttwo in five people
default living
default with sight loss are having difficulty making ends meet (McManus and 
defaultLord, 2012) this further financial burden 
defaultwill have
default 
defaultan amplified and 
defaultsignificant impact. An 
defaultincrease
defaultd two year
default discretionary housing payment budget
default,
default which the Government are relying on to offset the impact on disabled people
default, will not provide a long term s
defaultolution to the impact of this reform, 
defaultand we know already that it is not covering 
defaultall those who apply on the basis of their disability
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would like to see the Government take immediate and urgent steps to ensure that people with severe sight loss are ma
defaultde exempt from the new restrictions to reflect their mobility needs
default. This needs to happen urgently; 
defaultthe 
defaultGovernment's 
defaultproposed review date of March 2015 is too far away for many blind and partially sighted people already going through this process.
default&#xa0;
default27 September 2013
default&#xa0;
default