&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Walsall Housing Groupdefault1.0 defaultExecutive SummarydefaultThis submission
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.0 defaultAbout defaultwhgdefaultwhg
default is one of the largest social housing providers in the 
defaultWest Midlands
default. It owns and manages around 19,000 properties in the Metropolitan Borough of Walsall, housing almost 40,000 people, around one fifth of the borough’s population. 
defaultwhg
default was founded in 2003 with the transfer of Walsall Council’s housing stock and has since in
defaultvested over £350 million in 
defaultthat stock.  It 
defaulthas developed a range of services that go beyond the landlord’s traditional contractual role and support customers to sustain their tenancies.
default3.0 defaultReason for submissiondefaultWhg
default is 
defaulta large landlord
default 
defaultand has 
defaultconducted r
defaultesearch into the impact of the reforms and expects 
defaultsome challen
defaultges for
default 
defaultitself and its customers
default. It
default believes that its 
defaultfindings, 
defaultexperience
default and 
defaultdevelopment of 
defaultbest practice 
defaultwill help to
default 
defaultinform 
defaultthe 
defaultinquiry
default into
default the effects of welfare reform and how housing providers
default can mitigate them.
default    
default&#xa0;
default4.0 defaultImplications of the defaultwelfare reforms defaulton defaultwhgdefault defaultand defaultits customersdefaultw
defaulthg
default 
defaulthas assessed 
defaultthe potential impacts of 
defaultthe social sector size criteria, the overall benefit cap and the 
defaultdirect payment of Universal Credit
default. These 
defaultreform 
defaultmeasures were chosen because of the direct nature of their impact on housing providers
default and customers
default. 
default&#xa0;
default4.1 
defaultSize Criteria 
default&#xa0;
defaultw
defaulthg
default predicted that the social sector size criteria would affect 2,800 customers under-occupying according to the Department for Work and Pensions 
defaultoccupancy 
defaultrules. This would create a shortfall between rent due and benefit paid of some £1.9 million pounds
default pe
defaultr annum
default.
default 
defaultIt is still relatively early in the process of assessing the 
defaultactual 
defaultimpact, but 
defaultwhg’s
default 
defaultrecords 
defaultat the end of August suggest an increase in rent arrears 
defaultin excess of £750,000 in this financial year
default,
default of which 
defaultjust under £400,000 can be directly attri
defaultbuted to the size criteria
default. 
default 
defaultThe
default shortfall of 
defaultHousing Benefit represents the amount of total rent
defaultnot be
defaulting
default eligible for payment of Housing Benefit and which must be
defaultpaid by 
defaultwhg
default customers from elsewhere within their benefit income or other
defaultmeans.
default Initial research showed that 
default1 bedroom under
default-
defaultoccupiers
default had average rents of 
default£86.30
default per week and when a 
default14% 
defaultdeduction was applied, there w
defaultas 
defaulta 
default£12.05
default shortfall
default. Where 
default2 or more bedroom
defaults were under-occupied incurring a 25% deduction, the average weekly rent
default was 
default£84.82
default with a 
default£21.21
default shortfall
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4.2 
defaultDirect payments to Universal Credit claimants
default&#xa0;defaultH
defaultousing 
defaultBenefit has not 
defaultbeen 
defaultpaid 
defaultdirectly to 
defaultthe vast majority of 
defaultbenefit claimants in recent years, 
defaultso 
defaultit has been difficult to obtain consistent and reliable evidence on the likely magnitude of 
defaultpotential 
defaultloss of rent
default revenue from switching to payment to claimants 
defaultwhen Universal Credit is rolled out. 
defaultWhile 
defaultthe direct payment demonstration projects were set 
defaultup
default to provide such guidance
default, it has become apparent that there are many variations by location
default, the nature of the stock
default and 
defaultdemographics
default. 
defaultT
defaulthe guarded 
defaultculture around the projects 
defaulthas not 
defaultassisted 
defaultlandlords to 
defaultobtain 
defaulta feel for 
defaultthe magnitude of
default 
defaultdirect payments’ likely 
defaultimpact
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultGathering meaningful information has been 
defaultfurther complicated by changes to the 
defaultUniversal Credit 
defaultroll out programme
default. If the roll
default 
defaultout timescale, geographical spread and complexity of the claims allowed
default 
defaultis not known, provide
defaultrs cannot model the rate at which the effects of direct payment will be felt
default without a large margin of error
default.
default 
defaultWhg
default has therefore erred on the side of prudence by 
defaultsubstantially increasing 
defaultits bad debt provision.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4.3 
defaultOverall Benefit Cap
default&#xa0;
defaultThe benefit cap may
default lead to a loss of rent income
default where 
defaultfamilies 
defaulthave to adjust to 
defaultreduced budgets
default. 
defaultC
defaultapped households are being asked to prioritise their 
defaultspending 
defaultfrom a shrinking budget and th
defaulterefore
default housing providers are in competit
defaulti
defaulton with other
default demands on the household p
defaulturse
default. 
defaultAdvice agencies 
defaultoften 
defaultexpress the idea t
defaulthat 
defaultcustomers 
defaultshould prioritise the roof over 
defaulttheir heads, 
defaultbut the fact that excess
default awards are 
defaultsliced off 
defaultbenefit to pay for housing 
defaultsends a subliminal message to tenants that housing 
defaultis their 
defaultleast priority
default. 
defaultThis w
defaultill 
defaultinevitably lead to rent payments being missed, arrears being built up and tenancies at risk of not being sustained.     
default&#xa0;default5.0 defaultwhgdefault Mitigation against the impacts of reformdefaultAs a result of the impacts to the organisation and its customers, 
defaultwhg
default 
defaultdeveloped a
default comprehensive 
defaultaction plan to mitigate the 
defaultmajor 
defaulteffects of the reform measures with the aim
defaults
default of 
defaultmitigating the impacts on its customers 
defaultand 
defaultmaximising 
defaultits ability to 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultprovide 
defaultexcellent 
defaulthousing and related 
defaultservice
defaults. 
defaultSome 
defaultinitiatives from 
defaultthe plan are set out 
defaultbelow
default.
default5.1 Customer Services Training and Scripting
defaultThe impact of the reforms across 
defaultwhg’s
default customer base meant that as many colleagues as possible needed to be given relevant 
defaulttraining 
defaultabout the reforms so that a triage
default service was viable
default. Training enabled 
defaultwhg
default colleagues to help as many customers as possible with queries at the first point of contact, whilst more complex issues were referred to specialist
default colleagues
default. In addition, scripts were developed and available for 
defaultanyone in the business to access via the internal computer network to use to guide responses to incoming queries. 
default5.2 Communications Strategy
defaultThe broad impact also governed 
defaultwhg’s
default communications strategy. With a large number of affected customers, a variet
defaulty of
default methods of contact was adopted
default for 
defaultour diverse customer base. Methods adopted included personal contact, 
defaultmail shot
default, customer leaflets, website information, social media such as Twitter and 
defaultFacebook
default as well as engaging customers to talk about welfare r
defaulteform issues in the course of everyday business.
default5.3 Financial Inclusion Review
defaultF
defaultinancial inclusion provision was reviewed
default and the 
defaultdecision was taken to recruit three money mentors to supplement the Welfare Benefit and Debt Advice function and provide a tr
defaultiage service to customers 
defaultlikely to be af
defaultfected by under-occup
defaultation deductions and 
defaultthe benefit cap. It is expected that this work will continue for Universal Credit
default claimants who may be vulnerable and need help to cope with direct benefit payment to them.
default5.4 Direct Debit as Preferred method of Payment
defaultThe replacement of 
defaultlandlord direct 
defaultpayment with 
defaultdirect 
defaultpayment 
defaultto claimants of 
defaultUniversal Credit 
defaultwill 
defaultmean that customers 
defaultwill 
defaulthave 
defaulta responsibility to pay rent where th
defaulte fact that they pay rent 
defaultmay not necess
defaultarily be apparent to them under the current Housing Benefit system. The consequence will be that at least some proportion of rent payments will not be made because of the switch.
default 
defaultTo minimise loss
default of rent income from direct payment
default, 
defaultwhg
default adopted direct debi
defaultt as its preferred method of 
defaultpa
defaultyment. All new tenants since September 2012 have been required to set up direct debits or find a suitable 
defaultproxy 
defaultmethod
default such as via a budgeting or jam jar account. Extensive work has been done to incorporate affordability and 
defaultmoney management training into the pre-tenancy customer experience.
default This training is also available to those 
defaultcustomers who approach 
defaultwhg
default to give notice on their tenancy because they are experiencing affordability issues.
defaultT
defaulthe 
defaultadditional 
defaultgoal was set to get a
defaultll existing customers 
defaultto go on 
defaultto direct debit. To support this
default, 
defaulta choice of only two direct debit payment days per month has been replaced with ‘any day’ direct debit so that customers can synchronise their rent payment with the date that they receive ben
defaultefit payments.
default Our latest figures from August 2013 show that direct debit take up is increasing at roughly 400 customers on average each month.
default5.5 
defaultBudgeting or Jam Jar Accounts
defaultIf a customer does not have a
default bank account or is unsuitably banked, 
defaultwhg
default signpo
defaultsts its customers to the local 
defaultWalsave
default credit union
default. 
defaultWalsave
default 
defaultoffers a budgeting account w
defaulthich has the 
defaultfacility to mimic a direct debit payment
default. To encourage take up, 
defaultwhg
default pays the first year’s set up and administration costs of £23, which means that 
defaultcustomers do not have to pay transaction charges in the first year.
default A personal spending pot is set up and 
defaultwhg
default adds ten pounds to it on setting up the account with the ability to add another five pounds if the customer maintains a clear rent account for six
default months.
default 
defaultTo make it as easy as possible for customers to sign up for a budgeting account, 
defaulta
default 
defaultwhg
default colleague has been seconded to 
defaultWalsave
default to be available in the main 
defaultwhg
default reception area 
defaultso that 
defaultimmediate help
default is available if customers decide that a jam jar acc
defaultount is beneficial to them
default. 
defaultThe requirement for customers to pay by direct debit or ‘jam jar’ account attempts to mitigate the 
defaulteffects 
defaultof customers no longer pa
defaulty
defaulting by benefit direct. 
defaultwhg
default believes that 
defaulthousing should be considered as a
defaultn essential househol
defaultd expenditure
default along with council tax
default, utilities
default and food
default. In an ideal world, it would 
defaultprefer
default 
defaultpayment 
defaultunder Universal Credit to be made direct from benefit
default. 
default I
defaultn the medium to long term
default, this 
defaultwould result in lower 
defaultpublic sector 
defaultcosts as there would be less h
defaultomelessness and finance
default-
defaultrelated household stre
defaultss
default.)
default5.6 
defaultWincred
default (
defaultWalsall
default in Credit)
defaultAs planning for reform proceeded, 
defaultwhg
default was 
defaultwholly 
defaultaware that it could not do all of the work necessary to mitigate reform on its own. Partnership working was therefore of 
defaultvital importance
default. 
defaultIn Walsall, financial inclusion work is co-ordinated through the 
defaultWincred
default partnership, an umbrella organisation for all partners with an interest in the financial wellbeing of Walsall residents. Members include various department of the lo
defaultcal authority, 
defaultWalsave
default, Citizens Advice Bureau and various advice and third sector bodies. 
defaultThe partners
default have undertaken campaigns such as one warning vulnerable tenants against the threat of loan sharks and doorstep lenders.  
default5.7 I.T.’s Your Life
defaultPartners
defaulthip between 
defaultwhg
default and Walsall Adult and Community College (WACC) brought a 
defaultnew 
defaultdigital inclusion 
defaultinitiative 
defaultinto being
default. A small sample survey early in the process of welfare reform planning showed that only 58% or residents had suitable home-based internet a
defaultccess for the purpose of claiming Universal Credit in line with the government’s stated wish for people to claim online.
default The “I.T.’s Your Life” programme was born from th
defaulte partnership
default with WACC
default. The programme uses public facilities 
defaultsuch as public libraries
default 
defaultto run short courses which enable 
defaultpeople to get access to computers, develop skills to use online services and to set up an email address. 
defaultCrucially, 
defaultthose finishing the course are enabled to 
defaultm
defaultake and manage benefit claims digitally.
default5.8
default Independent Livin
defaultg Team workshops for external organisations
defaultAside from formal partnerships, 
defaultwhg’s
default Independent Living Team organised a series of free workshops 
defaultat which 
defaultpartner organisations, stakeholders
default, 
defaultNHS and other health and social services
default were 
defaultgiven a 
defaultpresent
defaultation 
defaultto engage them and make them more aware of welfare reform issues
default. This
default knowledge inform
defaulted
default their
default subsequent 
defaultinteractions with 
defaultthe 
defaultmore vulnerable
default customers
default affected by the changes
default. The
default series of eight
default workshops w
defaultas
default 
defaultover-subscribed and feedback rated the 
defaultsessions as excellent
default. The sessions were
default replicated regionally a
defaultt the request of the 
defaultWest Midlands Best Use of Stock partnership
default.
default6.0 defaultConclusiondefaultwhg’s
default approach to welfare reform recognises that the organisation and our customers will face difficult times a
defaults the welfare reforms come into effect and beyond. Plans were developed to include as many mitigating interventions as possible to help sustain tenancies and to maintain services. 
defaultThe mitigations have been positively received in Walsall and it is hoped tha
defaultt they will help to inform the debate on how tenants, especially vulnerable ones, can be helped
default nationally
defaultWhilst we cautiously look forward to the introduction of Universal Credit the issue of 
defaultdirect payment of the housing element of Universal credit is o
defaultne that should be reviewed. The greater benefit of household stability far outweighs the desire to replicate the household budget of working households.
default&#xa0;
default27 September 2013
default&#xa0;
default