&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten Evidence defaultsubmitted bydefault the Society of St Jamesdefault&#xa0;defaultBackgrounddefault&#xa0;defaultThe Society of St
default James is a housing association that provides
default services throughout Hampshire, Southampton and Portsmouth, specialising in supported housing for homeless people, people with substance misuse issues and people with mental health issues. We provide hostels, supported housing and permanent unsupported mov
defaulte-on housing with intensive housing management. We also provide various complementary services, such as drug treatment services, floating support, domiciliary care, social enterprises and a care home to provide a service for our clients when they can no lo
defaultnger cope in our mainstream services (generally after they have reached retirement age).
default&#xa0;
defaultDirect Rent Paymentsdefault&#xa0;defaultOver the last year we have carried out client consultation exercises concerning welfare reform, and the ending of direct rent payments is the is
defaultsue that they are most concerned about. Our long term tenants, who have a history of severe alcohol and/or drug issues and/or mental health issues and have been through the homelessness system, are particularly 
defaultworri
defaulted. They are now living with little or n
defaulto support from our organisation – and in most cases their substance use is under control, but they feel that this initiative is likely to place this comparative stability at risk. If their money comes through at a time when they are feeling lonely or depre
defaultssed, they can imagine blowing the rent on substance use – and once they get into rent arrears it is hard to repay them and easy to repeat the same mistake when their money comes through. They fear that they will be evicted and end up back in a homeless ho
defaultstel to start the process all over again – and 
defaultwe are
default concerned that this will cause an unwelcome and unnecessary demand on services which have already been cut due to austerity measures.
default&#xa0;
defaultMost of our accommodation is exempt from referral to the rent offic
defaulter
default, and we welcome Lord Freud’s assurances that the benefits claims of people living in such accommodation will be managed outside the Universal Credit System – so we will continue to be able to have rent paid direct to the landlord. However, many of our c
defaultlients move on to social or private rented housing and will be under similar pressures. So we would like to recommend that 
defaultpeople with a background of living in supported housing defaultshoulddefault continue to have the option of having their rent paid directly to the defaultaccommodation provider, irrespective of whom that accommodation provider is.default&#xa0;defaultPeople who live in supported housing have never ended up there by accident, and as services are increasingly rationed (as local authority budgets are squeezed) the people we work
default with have increasingly complex needs and chaotic lives. Most have had childhoods characterised by abuse, neglect or other trauma, and as adults have developed substance use issues, mental health issues, personality disorders, offending and other challengi
defaultng behaviour. Some will have the skills and motivation to make giant strides and end up in full time paid employment, but many never do. No matter how hard they search for work, they don’t have the skills that employers 
defaultneed, they are unused to the world o
defaultf work
default and th
defaultey have long gaps in their employment histories; many are in their fifties and haven’t had a job for thirty years. At a time when there are more people looking for work than there are jobs, there will always be some people who are unemployed a
defaultnd, if recruitment practices are at all effective, it is no surprise that the people who remain unemployed are those that have the least to offer employers, i.e. our clients.
default&#xa0;
defaultOne positive aspect of welfare reform is that the system will reduce the barrier
defaults to work, readying people for salaried positions. But this rather falls down in the case of people who are never going to be offered a salaried position. They may lack ‘upward mobility’, but ‘downward mobility’ is always a possibility.
default&#xa0;
defaultI see this as a ca
defaultse of “nudge theory” similar to pensions auto-enrolment: give clients the rent money in their hand and some will do the right thing – but others won’t, and it will result in an increased burden on public services. Put them on landlord rent direct and the o
defaultccasional one may opt out, but most people will stay with the status quo and do the right thing without having to try.
default&#xa0;
defaultPrisondefault&#xa0;defaultCurrently people in prison can continue to have their housing benefit paid for 13 weeks, or 26 weeks if they are on remand. So t
defaulthey still have somewhere to live when they are released. Ending this will lead to people having nowhere to go when they leave prison, once again creating a needless burden on homelessness services which have no spare capacity to meet increased demand. This
default is the case even for remand prisoners who may be released having not been convicted of any crime – but the punishment will be losing their home.
default&#xa0;
defaultSo we would like to recommend that 
defaultwhen a person is sent to prison they should be allowed to keep their Univedefaultrsal Credit claim open, and UC will cover their housing costs for 13 weeks, or 26 weeks if they are on remand.default&#xa0;default27
default September 2013
default&#xa0;
default