&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by The Co-operative Legal Services (LAI 0063)default1.1 The Co-operative Legal Services welcomes this inquiry by the Joint Committee on Human Rights and is pleased to respond.
default&#xa0;
default We feel concerned that the effects of the recent changes of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offe
defaultnders Act (2012)
default (hereon referred to as LASPOA)
default are dramatic with many unintended and unwelcome consequences.
default&#xa0;
default We welcome the Ministry of Justice’s decision to re-consult on certain matters, but fear that the proposed changes will have a further negative i
defaultmpact on vulnerable people needing to access justice. We call upon government to properly review the LASPOA outcomes before effecting further change. 
default 2. About usdefault2.1 
defaultThe Co-operative Group is the UK’s largest mutual business, owned not by private shareholders but by over seven million consumers.
default&#xa0;
default It is the UK’s fifth biggest food retailer and a financial services provider. Among its other businesses are the largest fun
defaulteral services provider, the third largest pharmacy chain and one of Britain’s largest farming operations. As well as having clear financial and operational objectives, the Group has also set out its social and sustainability goals in its groundbreaking Eth
defaultical Plan, which specifies over 50 commitments in these areas. The Group operates 4,800 retail trading outlets, employs more than 100,000 people and has an annual turnover of more than £14bn.
default&#xa0;
default Further information is available at 
defaultwww.co-operative.coop
default.
default2.2 The Co-operative Legal Services (CLS) was founded in 2006. In March 2012 it received approval from the 
defaultSolicitors Regulation Authority
default to become an "
defaultalternative business structure
default" (ABS) allowing it
default to offer a range of legal services previously only offered in solicitors’ firms.  
default2.3 CLS currently offers a wide range of consumer-facing legal services including conveyancing, family Law, wills, probate, personal injury, employment law.
default2.4 Our family 
defaultlaw service, launched in September 2012, offers the fullrange of family law services like divorce, mediation, cohabitation agreements and pre-nuptial agreements, help and advice for victims of domestic abuse, and all services concerning children, including
default adoption rights, contact rights and child abduction.
default2.5 We are the largest provider of legal aid family law services across England and Wales.  We aim to make the law simple and accessible for the consumer and promote access to justice for all.
default3. Respondefaultse to the request for evidencedefault3.1 There is a growing body of evidence to suggest that changes to the legal aid sys
defaulttem through the LASPOA
default are having a deleterious impact on those areas still in scope for legal aid, for example, domestic violence, mediation and housing. 
default3.2 Through our own research (shortly to be published), and those of our colleagues in the justice system, we have identif
defaultied significant drops in take up of access to legal aid where government and all key stakeholders agreed that it was essential legal aid remained to support the most vulnerable in our society. The significant decrease in take up is not due to less domestic
default violence or homelessness but rather to the difficulties that members of the public are encountering in being aware of the remaining legal aid provisions and in accessing providers.
default3.3. We will be in a position to share this intelligence shortly and would
default hope that it will give government pause for thought to analyse the consequences for society of the current changes before implementing further, potentially damaging change. 
default4.  The proposed Ministry of Justice changesdefault4.1 We welcome the Ministry of Justi
defaultce’s willingness to consult further on the further changes to the legal aid system following widespread disquiet after the consultation process in May 2013. However, it is disappointing that government did not wait until the outcome of this committee’s wor
defaultk before responding to the civil aspects of it’s consultation in ‘Transforming Legal Aid’. The majority of proposals, which will disadvantage many in society, will go ahead, although with modifications in some areas. We firmly believe that the committee is
default right to wish to scrutinise these proposals and had hoped that government would await your views instead of pressing on through delegated legislation 
default4.2 Residence Test:
default 
defaultWe are opposed, as a matter of principle, to the proposed residence test for the 
defaultvast majority of legal aid applicants. This will deny access to justice for some of the most vulnerable remaining within the scope of eligibility for legal aid. There is no justification for a residence test in family cases (where rules of jurisdiction alr
defaulteady apply) which may involve domestic abuse, forced marriage, child abduction or state intervention in family life.
defaultThe government has conceded that it is inappropriate to apply a residence test to children under a year old, in cases where the individual 
defaultis particularly vulnerable (details to be published in due course), or where a case relates to the protection of children. The changes are expected to apply from early 2014.
defaultWhilst these changes are welcome, they will make the legal aid scheme even more co
defaultmplex for members of the public to understand whether or not they are eligible and for practitioners to administer. Additionally, we are particularly concerned about the needs of those involved in child abduction cases. We are of the providers of legal ser
defaultvices in such cases through the Foreign and Commonwealth Office’s Child Abduction Unit.  As it is currently proposed, it is flawed.  The meaning of “residence” as drafted in the original consultation document was unclear.   
default4.3 Judicial Review
default: Removing l
defaultegal aid for all judicial review cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects for success: It is proposed that the Legal Aid Authority will have discretion to fund cases resolved before a judge decides on permission to proceed, but it appears this will 
defaultbe exercised retrospectively. 
defaultThere will
default be a further mini-consultation
default, focusing on criteria that the Legal Aid Authority will use. But this concession is hollow whatever its outcome because the MoJ still expects claimants to take all pre-action steps (i
defaultncluding any mediation), to issue and pursue complex cases without any funding in place. The proposed discretion to grant it only once a case is concluded leaves all the risks and linked disincentives intact. 
defaultIt follows that many legally-aided judicial re
defaultviews which currently settle pre-permission (the majority of those the MoJ funds, in fact) will either need to be litigated far more aggressively than before to maximise the prospects of inter partes costs recovery, or will not be taken in the first place 
defaultdespite having real merit. Complex health, community care and 
defaultpublic law Children Act-
defaultrelated cases will be amongst the hardest hit. This is no way to fund a system there to ensure those with the greatest power - public authorities - comply with the rule o
defaultf law. 
default4.4 Payment for providers of legal aid: 
defaultThe
default government has also decided to proceed with a 10% cut in Family Public Law Representation fees, despite this being an arbitrary figure without an evidence base. We are concerned that this will further des
defaulttabilise the already fragile supplier base in this area of great need and specialism. We are concerned that this will lead to many legal practices no longer being commercially viable (especially with the proposed 17.5% reduction in criminal legal aid fees 
defaultas this will have a serious impact on legal businesses which deliver on both crime and family contracts). 
default4.5. Reduced scope of legal aid for prisoners: 
defaultAlthough this does not directly impact our service provision at the current moment in time, it is wort
defaulth registering that prisoners
default are
default also protected by human rights legislation in this country and it is important that this is taken into account.  A basic human right is the ability to access justice.  Article 5(3) and 5(4) of the Human Rights Act (1998) cl
defaultearly states: 
default“3. 
defaultEveryone arrested or detained in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1(c) of this Article shall be brought promptly before a judge or other officer authorised by law to exercise judicial power and shall be entitled to trial withi
defaultn a reasonable time or to release pending trial. Release may be conditioned by guarantees to appear for trial.
defaultE+W+S+N.I.default“4. Everyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his
default detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.”
default5. Conclusiondefault5.1 
defaultThere are clearly some very worrying, unwelcome and unforeseen consequences arising out of the first six months post the enactment of
default the LASPOA
default. We would urge 
defaultthe 
defaultgovernment to undertake a full review of the
defaultse outcomes before launching 
defaultfurther action which could fundamentally undermine the rule of law in England and Wales.
default27 September 2013
default