&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by Stuart Taylor [OLS0040]default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultFIRST:default  Congratulations, this is an excellent enquiry, and I wish and pray for your every success in it and that God may honour 
defaultyour endeavours.
default&#xa0;defaultWHOdefault:default 
default              
defaultA) 
defaultI write primarily as a parent / householder who has
default, with my wife, had the experience and responsibility of bringing up three sons and two daughters, seeking to teach them 
default‘the good and right 
defaultway’
default  default(
default1 Sam 12 v 23)
default in view of marriage and the setting up of their own households.
default&#xa0;
defaultB) 
defaultI also write as a Chri
defaultstian 
defaultholding the Holy Scriptures 
defaultas being the Word of God, affording all the guidance needed to protect our children.  
defaultIsaiah 7 v 
default15
default default ‘that
default he may know to refuse the evil and to choose the good.’  
defaultRomans 16 v 19
default default‘to be wise as to that which is good, and s
defaultimple as to evil.’
default  
default1 Tim 5 v 
default22
default default ‘keep
default thyself pure.’  
default2 Tim 2 v 
default22  ‘
defaultbut
default youthful lusts flee.’
default&#xa0;
defaultPARENTS:default  The prime responsibility to protect our children rests with the parents.  We are responsible to care for them physically, morally and financially, a
defaultnd instruct them as to purity before marriage.  Quoting the words of a Church Leader, ‘the greatest thing a man can do is to preserve his household [
defaulteg
default children]’.  
defaultActs 16 v 
default31
default  ‘Believe
default on the Lord Jesus and thou 
defaultshalt
default be saved, thou and thy house.’
default&#xa0;
defaultYou
defaultng people have naturally inquisitive minds and every possibl
defaulte effort should be taken to hinder the promotion of
default devices or circumstances which would leave them vulnerable or exposed.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs parents, along with other Christians, we set up our own schools in 19
default93 to endeavour to protect our children from the sadly declining activities and conversations amongst teenage children.  We also supplied them with computers which are limited and blocked from the defiling, corrupt and damaging materials which could normal
defaultly be accessed.  I know from bitter experience that contact with unclean literature can damage you for life.  I personally know a Peer who always videos programmes before his children view them, taking out the harmful sections.
default&#xa0;defaultINDUSTRY:default  As employers, we
default would be selective of areas and buildings which we would work in and would personally 
defaultbe
default proactive in protection of our trainees and sub-contractors.  The conditions of engagement include that no pornographic material or means of accessing it is taken on 
defaultsite.
default&#xa0;
defaultGOVERNMENT:default  The government does have a responsibility to protect hum
defaultanity and should be seen to be 
defaulta terror to evil.  
defaultRomans 13 v 
default3
default  default‘For
default rulers are not a terror to a good work, but to an evil one.’
default  Filth is evil.
default&#xa0;
defaultI would fully support that is sh
defaultould be mandatory for Government to impose strict sanctions where licensing for publications are granted with a penalty in place where these are not adhered to.
default&#xa0;
defaultSUGGESTIONS:default  Your suggestion of default blocking facilities on all marketed internet devices 
defaultis excellent. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe introduction of passwords or filters, such as declaration of age
default 
defaultor a ‘general knowledge’ question, the answer to which would be unlikely to be known by anyone under the age of 18
default, before access can be obtained is another suggestion.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultAnother possibility may be to link all licensed sites to national records such as registration of birth certificates / national insurance numbers / driving licence number, so that if a person’s details entered cannot be matched, access is denied.
default&#xa0;
defaultThank yo
defaultu for the opportunity of contributing to this enquiry.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default