&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by Ldefaultldefaultoyd Johnston [OLS0043]default&#xa0;
defaultBackgrounddefaultHaving been born into a Christian household 30 years ago.  I was brought up by my parents to live my life in accordance with the principles set out in the Bible.  I have lived amongst Christians all my life and have proved times without number
default the benefits and protection of living with a sense of the guiding hand of God in my life.
defaultDevelopments in Information TechnologydefaultOver the past 
defaultcentury
default developments in communications and information technology have increased at an outstanding rate.  There 
defaulthave been significan
defaultt benefits to these developments in the business, political, education and many other sectors.  However, there has also been with an alarming rate an increase in the exposure of risk to children.  At one time there were only computers f
defaultound in businesses, now if you asked most children of a reasonable age they would have in their pocket a phone of some type which would have access to the internet.
defaultRisks of Today’s Information TechnologydefaultThe access that the majority of children have to th
defaulte internet is beneficial to them in many ways to assist them with their education etc.  However, the risk that this poses at the current time is horrendous.  There are two areas to which they are most vulnerable.  The first is that they are exposed to any 
defaultharmful contact online (e.g. grooming and sexting
default).  The second is that they can easily access 
defaultlegal adult content that's not appropriate for their age.
defaultOfcom have stated that 
default81% of children aged 14-16 have viewed ADULT material online.default  They have also fo
defaultund that 
defaultonly 46% of parent have filters in place on their home internet.  defaultSurely these two facts stand on their own, they give us a clear message that the status-quo is simply not acceptable.  These risks cannot go on.  Exposing a child to such filth coul
defaultd seduce their immature minds and change their characters for life.  Such tools are being used in the world today to infiltrate, defile and corrupt the morals of simple people.  A child with their inquisitive and 
defaultcurious mind
default may by total accident come acr
defaultoss such material on the internet, they will instinctively click to look further and this one click is all it takes to scar, change the character and ruin that child’s life.  The youth today is being corrupted by the modern age.  This has a knock on effect
default in the modern society where what was previously classed as unacceptable conduct is accepted now as normal.  There are sadly in the world today evil persons seeking to attract children
default for filth through the electronic labyrinth of evil (the electronic syst
defaultems of today).
defaultI have been saved from my sins by the redeeming power of the precious blood of Jesus “who gave himself for our sins, so that he should deliver us out of the present evil world” (Galatians 1 v 4).  
defaultI was
default once under the power of Satan “he who 
defaultis called Devil and Satan, he who deceives the whole habitable world” (Revelation 12 v 9) 
defaultbut I am
default now saved for eternity
default. 
default 
defaultI
defaultt is utterly abhorrent to me to think that we who live in a Christian country are allowing for such 
defaultpollution to be available to yo
defaultung tender minds. 
default 
defaultResolution to the Unprotected Electronic AgedefaultIt is with great appreciation I see that the Government are reviewing this whole issue.  I fully support them in finding a resolution which will protect the young people 
defaultand all residents 
defaultof the United Kingdom from evil persons who would seek to harm them and from the adult material which is posted online.
defaultThere is one point I would fervently impress on the committee that they consider in reviewing suitable solutions.  This is that any IT d
defaultevices sold in the United Kingdom should 
defaulthave a standard setting on it which by default blocks all adult content on the internet.  There should also be improved age-verification software installed on all devices.
defaultI believe that some have tried to argue aga
defaultinst suggestions such as I make above because of freedom of choice.  We need to face the facts, 100 years ago such things as websites displaying this filth were not only not even thought about, 
defaultand had 
defaultthey
default been they
default would have been outlawed immediately.  
defaultOur previous generations then had no need for such material – why the change, can anyone justify to me why we need it now? 
defaultIt is with greatest respect I submit this to the committee and will continue to pray that God in his infi
defaultnite wisdom will give you t
defaulthe strength to stand for His rights, the protection of our nation’s Christian values and the protection of the people (especially the vulnerable children) of the United Kingdom.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default