Written edefaultvidence defaultsubmitted by thedefault Legal Aid Practitioners Group (LAPG) default(LAI 0073)defaultT
defaulthe Committee seeks evidence from anyone with an interest in the human rights issues raised by the following proposals in particular:
default1. Legal Aid Practitioner Group is a membership body for organisations (private practice and not-for-profit) with legal aid contracts with the Legal Aid Agency. Our members are based throughout England and Wales and cover all areas of law.
default We meet r
defaultegularly with the Ministry of Justice and Legal Aid Agency on policy and operational issues affecting our members.
defaultSummarydefault2. It is LAPG’s view that these proposals wholly undermine the fundamental common law right of access to the court for all. The chang
defaultes are a direct attack on the rule of law and will have an immediate adverse impact not only on vulnerable client groups, but also on all clients seeking legal advice for a range of civil problems. In summary we consider that
default3. 
defaultThese proposals must not be rushed through with little Parliamentary scrutiny. 
defaultWe are concerned that these proposals will 
default&#xa0;
defaultResidence testdefault - defaultThe defaultproposed introduction of a residence test for civil legal aid claimants, so as to limit legal aid to those with a “strong connection” with the UKdefault4. 
defaultIn our response
default to the Transforming Legal Aid Consultation LAPG took the view that this proposal is unlawful, unjust, impractical
default, discriminatory
default and unnecessary.
default  defaultDespite the amendments made to the proposal we remain of this view.
default 
defaultThere are two limbs to the proposal: to
default be lawfully resident in the UK, crown dependencies or overseas territories 
defaultanddefault to have resided lawfully in these places for
default a ‘continuous period’
default 
defaultof 
default12 months. 
default5. We are aware that the JCHR has limited resources and that others have dealt with issues of 
defaultlegality e.g. Dr Nick Armstrong and Paul Bowen QC. We endorse their responses and in particular Dr Nick Armstrong’s analysis of the very limited nature of the concessions made by the Government (
defaultpara
default 6 onwards). We would also highlight Treasury Counsel’s r
defaultesponse to the original consultation and their concerns about the residence test.
default6. It is important to emphasise that 
defaultall clientsdefault will need to meet the test. The scale of the task is immense both for practitioners and for the Legal Aid Agency in checking that the test is met. 
defaultIn 2012-13 alone there were:
default&#xa0;
default 
default(a) 
default590
default,
default410 Civil Legal Help funded acts of assistance; 
default(b) 
default139,083 authoris
defaulted acts of certificated representation.
defaultThis means that if current take-up continues, 729,493 people will have to meet the test, and prove that they do so before legal aid can be provided. 
defaultIt is our view that removing legal aid from people who do not meet 
defaultthe residence test will result in some of the neediest and most vulnerable people being placed at immediate risk of harm or even death. This is not acceptable in a democratic and civilised society, with a reputation for upholding fundamental principles of 
defaultaccess to justice. Even those who would meet the residence test will be excluded for the reasons we set out below.
default7. We are a practitioner organisation and our members deliver legal aid services on the ground to clients day in, day out. We would therefore
default like to draw attention to the practical effect of this proposal on clients and access to justice. Clients seeking legal advice on areas which remain within scope of LASPOA are, in the main, due to the refocusing of legal aid on priority areas, those seeki
defaultng advice regarding protection of the person or their home. The eligible client group is therefore by definition more vulnerable than previously. Already there have been additional burdensome requirements placed on clients to produce evidence to prove thei
defaultr eligibility and that their case falls within the scope of the new legal aid scheme. The more hurdles put in the path of vulnerable clients, the harder it is to reach the point where any advice is accessible and offered. Legal Action Group has highlighted
default the drop in the number of people obtaining advice – the reduction is far greater than the effect of LASPOA:  
defaulthttp://www.lag.org.uk/policy-campaigns/legal-aid-secret-service.
defaultaspx
default8. Clients who are vulnerable and in the stressful situations that necessitate advice can only obtain that advice at present if they:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default9. P
defaulteople seeking legal advice
default under the legal aid scheme are invariably vulnerable and are often facing a time of great stress. Already the number of organisations offering a legal aid service has declined drastically and it is now extremely difficult for clients to find the advice th
defaultey need from someone who is skilled, able and willing to take on the case. Even if they do find a practitioner who is willing to assist, not only do they
default have to overcome the financial evidence hurdle
default, but if the residence test is introduced, clients will 
defaultalso have to meet a further documentary evidence threshold for even the most basic legal advice. 
defaultMany cli
defaultents will struggle (and fail) to provide documentary evidence of all 
defaultelements
default of the various tests to access legal advice
default. 
defaultThis will leave them without
default the protection they need. Many will be homeless or placed at risk of violence or abuse as a result.
default&#xa0;
default10. We met with the 
defaultMoJ
default to discuss what documentary evidence was being proposed by the Ministry to meet the test. On the ‘lawful residence’ limb of the te
defaultst it was proposed that the following evidence might be sufficient – a valid passport or a valid visa. On the ‘continuous period of 1 year’ limb it was suggested that evidence might include audited accounts from the person’s business, a letter from their e
defaultmployer, letters from their children’s school etc. There was a helpful discussion however the outcome was that the test would not be met by many of the most vulnerable groups such as those in crisis, those fleeing violence, the disabled and mentally ill. T
defaulthese groups are highly unlikely to have the documentary evidence to meet the test and even if they are in fact eligible, would fail because of the evidence requirement.
default&#xa0;
default1
default1
default. Lawful residence. The problems in proving this will include the following:
default12. Lawfully Resident for One Year. People will also have to prove that they have been in the country for a continuous period of year (subject to a permitted 30 day absence). How will people 
defaultwho are in crisis accommodation, who have fled their home, who are homeless be able to prove this? These are factors which will be hurdles:-
default13
default.
default In reality, many of the clients our members advise have chaotic lives. They do not bring with them organised lever arch files of bank statements, passports, visas, letters fr
defaultom GPs or schools. Take a person who has been discharged from psychiatric hospital without suitable housing. S/he is unlikely to have evidence to meet the residence test. Clients with dementia, learning disabilities, people who are street homeless etc
default.
default who need advice will not be able to produce the necessary proof. Everyone will be affected by the test because everyone will have to meet it to qualify for legal aid.
default 
default14. The Government’s purported concessions on excluding the most vulnerable from the re
defaultsidence test will not cure the problem. In particular, the removal of ‘detention’ cases will not, on the current proposals, apply for example to people lacking mental capacity who are de facto detained in care homes, hospitals or in their own homes, or who
default are being abused or neglected. If ‘detention’ cases only apply to, for example, persons who are being detained under the Mental Health Act, then this still leaves a whole host of other clients who are in a similar position (but not necessarily formally ‘d
defaultetained’) without any access to legal advice or protection.
default15. 
defaultThese are the questions we asked before
default and which we still think need answering.
default(a)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow many people will be affected by the test? How many will be excluded from legal protection because the test 
defaultis correctly applied? 
default(b)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow many eligible clients will be unlikely to meet the test because of the evidence requirements?
default(c)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIs there any evidence of people coming to the UK simply to obtain legal aid for legal advice about the matters which remain within scop
defaulte of legal aid (
defaulti.e.
default 
defaultnon-monetary
default matters)?
default(d)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat
default, if any,
default savings to the public purse will be achieved by the residence test?
default We think that it will cost far more to administer than any savings, and create satellite disputes and litigation.
default(e)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow have any 
defaultcos
defaulttings
default been calculated?  What management Information/
defaultdata did
default the 
defaultMo
defaultJ
default rely on in making these calculations?
default This is not yet available.
default(f)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat will legal representatives have to do to get relevant information to prove residence of an applicant? 
defaultHow will this b
defaulte funded? If a person is mentally incapacitated or in crisis and cannot access the required information, who will pay for the work in obtaining the information? Will the client be turned away because this work will not be funded?
default(g)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow will the test
default affect the ability of those wi
defaultth LAA contracts to use delegated
default powers so that the clients can be represented at initial 
defaulturgent 
defaulthearings?
default These cases often involve applications to protect the person, and it would be appalling if persons at risk could not 
defaultaccess advice or protection because of, for example, failure to produce a passport (which they may not have), or letters showing employment (which may not be applicable).
default16.  Our conclusion is that the residence test on the ground represents another serio
defaultus barrier to justice. While others will cover the legal points we made in our consultation response we very much want the JCHR to consider the practical implications of this proposal.
default&#xa0;defaultPrisonersdefault: The proposed restrictiondefault on the scope of legal aid available to prisonersdefault1
default7
default. We support the evidence submitted by the Association of Prison Lawyers. 
defaultOur main concerns are
default that
default:
defaultW
defaultithout entering into a detailed analysis of relevant case
default 
defaultlaw (which others are better placed to do so),
default simply because a person has been imprisoned for a crime does not mean that all rights should be denied to them
default&#xa0;defaultJudicial review:default The proposal that providers of legal services in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid fodefaultr work done on the case if the Court grants permission for the application to proceeddefault1
default8
default. As with so
default many of these proposals the Government does not seem to have given proper consideration or thought through the true cost of its proposals and any perverse 
defaultincentives created. The original responses to the TLA Consultation highlighted these and they remain. 
defaultThe 
defaultMoJ’s
default response to the 16,000 consultations has been to propose that where a 
defaultjudicial review 
defaultcase has been issued and settles without permission having
default been granted, the LAA 
defaultmay
default nevertheless pay the lawyers provided there is a good reason why the defendant has not been ordered to pay
default costs
default.
default1
default9
default. It is essential to highlight the effect on those seeking redress through judicial review - the system is of cou
defaultrse designed for individuals to enforce rights, and not to ensure a good income for lawyers. However rights do not exist in a vacuum. We would highlight one practical issue of all of the recent legal aid cuts – the inability of legal aid practitioners to c
defaultarry out an ever increasing amount of work unpaid or ‘at risk’. Already legal aid fees are below what is understood to be ‘the market rate’ (for example for much civil legal aid the rates are those set in 1994, less the 10% cut imposed in October 2011) but
default that does not explain the real cost of carrying out legal aid work. There is already considerable unpaid time which people will refer to in this response e
default.
defaultg.
default 
defaultchecking financial eligibility, helping clients obtain evidence of domestic violence, filling in
default the exceptional funding form, but also the unremitting complexity of the revised legal aid system means that it would be quite easy to work a ten hour day and only produce five definite chargeable hours which might be paid.
default20
default. As a membership organisation we know the pressures our members are under and we can confirm that the line has been reached where no further cuts to even the low levels of funding can be 
defaultsustained. The rest of the work carried out by firms does not suppor
defaultt cross-subsidisation of unpaid or at risk legal aid work. The ‘concession’ of a discretionary payment if the case settles pre permission but costs are not paid by the opponent will not help to ensure that practitioners can carry out legal aid work. This i
defaults because such work cannot reach that stage without guarantees of some payment, even at low legal aid rates.
default21. It is important to explain that judicial review cases, unlike other types of litigation, involve extensive work in the early stages to prepare 
defaultthe case for issue. Other litigation can start with a simple application form and short statement, and the costs are very low. This is not the case for most judicial reviews, because what is required in bringing proceedings is a detailed document setting o
defaultut the legal grounds of challenge, supported by full evidence. The duty to the Court to make full disclosure from the start of the case means that the work is very heavy and labour intensive in the early stages of the case. All of this work will be at risk
default if the proposal proceeds, and the result will be that practitioners simply will not take the risk of either not being granted permission (because for example, a third party takes some action outside the practitioner’s control rendering the proceedings aca
defaultdemic) or not receiving the discretionary payment from the Legal Aid Agency.
default22. There is a simple solution. The LAA is legally and contractually responsible for considering legal aid applications for judicial review, applying the relevant Merits Regulatio
defaultns and criteria, and deciding which cases warrant public funding to take forward. Only meritorious cases should succeed. Moreover the Judge, on considering permission, and in refusing permission in those cases could certify that the case was ‘wholly withou
defaultt merit’ and recommend that the practitioner’s costs should not be paid. We do not think that political rhetoric should overturn this procedure.
default23. To allow the LAA to have the discretion on payment, when the exceptional funding cases have been so limited
default, would be unlikely to persuade practitioners to take the risk. Valid cases, particularly those which are complex and therefore cost more initially to bring to permission, will simply not be brought at all. The Public Law Project has carried out considerab
defaultle work on Judicial Review trends and we urge the Committee to consider their findings. 
default24. We do urge the Committee to consider fully the importance of judicial review as a way for ordinary citizens (some of whose dependence on the state for assistance m
defaulteans that they would be severely affected by this proposal) to challenge large organisations and that that is important constitutionally. It is also of fundamental importance to ensure that the laws of the country apply to everyone.
default&#xa0;defaultThe proposal that defaultlegadefaultl aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success.default25.
default 
defaultBorderline cases are high priority but very rare cases including cases holding the state to account, public interest cases and cases concernin
defaultg housing, and 
defaultincluding asylum
default.
default26.
default 
defaultIt may not be possible to evaluate the chances of obtaining a successful outcome, because there is a dispute about the facts, the law or expert evidence.  These cases are not ones where the prospects of success are less than 50% or po
defaultor
default rather that
default t
defaulthe prospects 
defaultcannotdefault be assessed 
defaultbecause 
defaultthe court 
defaultm
defaultust interpret the law, decide on the disputed facts 
defaultor expert evidence
default.
default However much work is done there is no answer available in these circumstances and the matter needs to go before a judge.
default27. 
defaultThe current merits regulations provide that borderline cases can be funded by legal aid because of their importance, either to the
default individual or constitutionally because they are about holding the state to account.
default We remain of the view that they should continue to be funded, because of those reasons
default.
default If there is any doubt about the merit of the cases, then the Legal Aid Agency can (
defaultas it does at present) scrutinise the application for public funding particularly carefully.
default&#xa0;defaultIntroduction of these proposals.default2
default8
default. The proposals to introduce these major constitutional changes by means of secondary legislation with very limited Parliamenta
defaultry scrutiny is deeply worrying. 
default29. We also regret that the Minister has declined to delay implementation of the reforms pending the reporting by the 
defaultJoint 
defaultCommittee on the Human Rights implications of the proposals. 
default30. Finally it is also of extreme con
defaultcern that these proposed changes come so quickly after the detailed Parliamentary debates on LASPOA and after commitments to, for example, retaining
default legal aid for judicial review 
defaultwere made and reconfirmed by the Government.  
defaultThese proposals appear to overt
defaulturn such assurances.
defaultSeptember 2013
default7
default&#xa0;
default