WWC12defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr Ruth defaultMcLellandefault, Senior Lecturer at Southampton defaultSolent University.default1.default0default EXECdefaultUTIVEdefault SUMMARY default2.default0default CONTEXT AND BACKGROUNDdefault2.1 
defaultThis submission is based on my experience in the following roles and contexts
default in relation to the underachievement in education of white working class children.
default2.2 
defaultTh
defaulte
default 
defaultdoctorate
default study
default 
defaultwas designed to 
defaultanswer the research aim ‘who influences white working
default 
defaultclass boy’s higher education decision-making process?: the role of social networks’. As such, the evide
defaultnce I provide is focused on white working-class boys, aged 15-16. Providing additional context
default to my empirical 
defaultstudy, 
defaultresearch was undertaken through
default qualitative 
defaultprimary 
defaultdata
default collection
default 
defaultwhich 
defaultcomprised of 55 individual interviews and 7 group interviews wit
defaulth a 
defaultselection
default of 10
default working class
default boys
default across two secondary schools
default, their parent(s), a nominated teacher, a friend from school, head teacher
default of both schools
default, deputy head teacher
default from both schools
default and widening participation officers based at a local univer
defaultsity. 
defaultData was collected between 2008-2010.
default2.3 
defaultI have always had a very strong interest in the ed
defaultucational attainment of working 
defaultclass young people, coming from that social background myself, hence undertaking a doctorate in that area. 
defaultI therefore feel ab
defaultle to comment on the underachievemen
defaultt in education by white working 
defaultclass 
defaultpupils
default from a local and regional perspective.
default3.default0default FACTUAL INFORMATIONdefault3.1 
defaultThis section presents 
defaultthe key empirical findings from my study
default and addresses a number of points set out in the briefing document
default. Firstly, I would like to clarify that whilst my study focused on the role of social network
defaults
default on HE decision-making
default;
default underpinning HE decision-making 
defaultis
default the 
defaultrole
default of
default prior educational attainment
default, aspirations
default and widening participation activities; these will be discussed throughout this submission. 
default3.2 defaultExtent of white workingdefault defaultclass pupil’s educational underachievementdefault3.2.1 
defaultNotions of what it means to be working class
default is synonymous with disadvantage. Disadvantage in schools is generally measured by Free School Meals (
defaultFSM
default). 
defaultThe most recent 
defaultDepartment for Education
default (
defaultDfE
default, 2012)
default 
defaultresults show only 34.6% of students entitled to FSM achieved 5+ A*-C including English and math
default’s, compared to 62% of those not entitled to FSM.
default In addition, there is a wealth of statistical data published by a range of government departments proving the educational underachievement of white working class pupils. 
default3.3 defaultThe factors responsible for whidefaultte working class pupils’ educational underachievement, including the impact of home and family. default&#xa0;
default3.3.1 
defaultThe factors responsible for educational underachievement are v
defaultery complex
default and
default situated in a
default wide
default range of social, economic and local factors. 
default These inc
defaultlude, lack of prior attainment in school, which starts at a very young age
default;
default gaps are already large and visible 
defaultat 22 months of age 
default(Department for Children, School and Families
default, 2009) and these gaps continue to grow through school. In 
defaultaddition, literature 
defaulthighlights socio-economic disadvantage, race and gender, disengagement in education, impact of masculinity on boys’ attitudes to education, parents
default’
default levels of education, parents
default’
default occupations, parent
default’
defaults income, neighbourhood, social identi
defaultt
defaulty
default,
default 
defaultlow aspirations
default 
defaultand finally
default lack of access to social capital
default.  There is a wealth of information available on each of these 
defaultfactors;
default however, little has been written in the individual context of both white working class boys and girls, instead much of the research has tre
defaultated the group as homogenous. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4 defaultWhether the problem is significantly worse for white working class boys than girls. default&#xa0;
default3.4.1 
defaultAgain, there is a wealth of statistical evidence available proving that the problem is significantly worse for white working cla
defaultss boys than girls. For example, t
defaulthe most recent 
defaultDfE
default (Department for Education, 2012)
default report
default highlights the differences in gendered attainment; results show that 54.6% of boys achieved 5+A*-C including English and Math’s, compared to 61.9% of girls.  Unpac
defaultking this further
default,
default 
defaultChowdry
default et al (2008) identify that only 4% of white British boys move up from the middle of the educational attainment distribution at K
defaultey 
defaultS
defaulttage 
default2  to the top of the attainment distribution at Key Stage 4, whilst for white British girls,
default this figure is 10%. These statistics highlight the importance of gender and show that there is an attainment issue for white British boys between Key Stage 2 and 
defaultKey Stage 4
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4.2 
defaultPoor attainment at 
defaultKey Stage 4
default also impacts upon HE participation. 
defaultHEFCE (2010, p.2) quantifies that “the participation rate of young men now trails that of young women by a decade and over the past 15 years around 270,000 fewer young men than young women have entered HE”. 
default 
default3.4.3 
defaultFrom my experience teaching students on a
defaultn ‘access
default to HE
default’ course in HE, I have found this to be predominately made up of 
defaultmales
default from a range of ethnic groups. For example, this academic year 2013-14, the course has recruited 
default230 students, approximately 80% are male
default.
default&#xa0;default3.5 defaultWhat steps schools can takdefaulte to improve the educational outcomes and attainment of white working class defaultpupils?default default&#xa0;default3.5.1 
defaultMy study found that disadvantaged families had high aspirations however; their immediate social networks had little educational experience. This directly impacted o
defaultn the amount of educational social capital resource available within the network to help mobilise aspirations, which in turn raised motivation for attainment. 
default&#xa0;
default3.5.2 
defaultMy study researched into a ‘network approach’ whereby the boy, his family, friends and the school all identified their role in supporting with attainment and educational progression. 
defaultUltimately, e
defaultveryone has a role to play in improving educational outcomes
default and attainment of white working class pupils. 
defaultThere needs to be joined up thinking between the school, the pupil and the home in order to develop a ‘collaborative influence’. Therefore allowing aspirations to be shared and aligning 
defaultpositive 
defaultmessages to th
defaulte pupil in the network. This 
defaultapproach
default allow
defaults
default network members to compensate those disadvantaged families with limited access to social capital. For example, one boy in my study wanted to be a doctor, however this aspiration was not shared between the school
default or home.  The school was invited to send widening participation pupils to participate in a medical aspiration raising event at a local university, but the boy was not invited to attend. This left the boy feeling angry that he had not been chosen.  
default&#xa0;
default3.5.3
default 
defaultMy research concluded that schools are 
defaultbest 
defaultplaced to support with 
defaultaspiration raising which 
defaultfurther 
defaultimpacts upon attainment; schools are a conduit between pupils and aspiration raising activities. In addition, schools are full of staff 
defaultthat
default have access to
default social capital and networks and know how to develop this capital. However
default there is a role for other members of the boy’s network
default, who may not be aware of the term ‘social capital’ and the benefits that it can bring to young people
default. I recommend that school
defaults work more closely with network members in order to 
defaulttrain
default and educat
defaulte
default them on the role 
defaultand value 
defaultof social networks and 
defaulthow to 
defaultutilis
defaulte
default social capital that is available within the
default immediate and wider
default network. 
default&#xa0;
default3.5.
default4
default 
defaultTeachers generally have access to social networks 
defaultwhich possess
default social capital. Schools should encourage teachers to utilise their social networks in order to support pupils with aspiration raising. For example, the entire music department in one of the sc
defaulthools in my study developed strong relationships with the local colleges
default’
default music departments and invited them to attend performances/recitals in order to support college aspiration and transition.  
defaultIn turn, the pupils worked with focus and determination in 
defaulttheir music lessons and attained well, allowing them to study music at college. 
default&#xa0;
default3.5.
default5
default 
defaultA number of teachers had developed a ‘holistic approach’ to developing the pupils which focused on more than learning and teaching, specifically on 
defaultraising 
defaultaspirations 
defaultand attainment for future life roles. 
defaultThese teachers understood the value of the social network to support working class pupils aspirations and attainment.
default&#xa0;
default3.5.
default6
default 
defaultMy research found that the value of ‘talk’ was highly beneficial to raising aspirations and f
defaulturther
defaultmore
default, talk was a catalyst for positive emotions and actions. Talking helped pupils to extract value from exposure to widening participation activities. However, whilst pupils attended widening participation events, there was very little follow up fro
defaultm their teachers, as their focus was on attainment within their subject, rather than on aspiration for attainment. 
default&#xa0;
default3.6 defaultThe potential for a wider range of educational approaches, for example vocational pathways, to improve outcomes for white working classdefault pupils.default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default default&#xa0;
default3.6.1 
defaultCitizenship education 
defaultneeds to include training on forms of capital
default,
default for example, what it is, how it is developed, benefits, barriers to development, etc. This way young people will be able to identify networks and social capital that is
default available and how best to develop/utilise it. 
default3.6.2 
defaultDist
defaultribution of widening 
defaultparticipation
default resources should be assessed. Currently 
defaultHEFCEs widening participation fund is directly given to
default Higher Education Institutions
default 
default(
defaultHEI
defaults
default)
default 
defaultwho
default then decide on the best way to spend the money. Whilst I acknowledge that HEIs outreach staff do spend a considerable amount of time in schools, they generally attend an event and then depart, unable to spend more time in the school and unable to fully un
defaultderstand the barriers to widening participation, aspiration and attainment that the pupils at the school face. HEI outreach staff provide a very importance service, they are a conduit between the school and the university and have an invaluable role to pla
defaulty.  
default3.7 defaultWhat role Government can play in delivering improved educational outcomes for whitedefault-defaultworking class pupils.default3.7.1 
defaultFurther work needs to be undertaken on targeting the correct group for outreach activities. My study found that those pupils who attend
defaulted aspiration activities included advantaged pupils, who were chosen because they were well behaved and were up to date on coursework. However, these students had strong aspirations and were motivated to attain at schoo
defaultl. 
defaultThe disadvantaged students who wou
defaultld have benefitted the most were not 
defaultalways 
defaultinvited. 
default3.7.2 Mothers play a nurturing role and genuinely valued education and understood how it could increase social mobility. The mothers in my study demonstrated a strong work ethic and a number had returne
defaultd to education
default/training
default as mature adults. The mothers discussed how they talked to their children about their return to education/training and study experiences and their sons discussed how they were able to watch their mothers enjoy learning. The outcome 
defaultof access to education/training allows mothers (and fathers) to access wider networks and resources, which can be drawn upon to 
defaultsupport their children and raise
default their aspirations. The government should make available budgets to allow disadvantaged parents 
defaultaccess to 
defaulteducation/training including support for part-time provision. 
default3.7.3 University outreach is highly valued 
defaultby
default pupils especially on campus visits, however teachers rarely attended due to their value in the classroom. This is a missed opportunity as
default teachers attending would allow them to further develop their social network 
defaultwith university staff 
defaultand moreover be able to talk to their 
defaultpupils
default about the aspiration raising activities in order to increase attainment. Schools need to be encouraged to 
defaultlet te
defaultachers attend outreach activities. 
default3.8 defaultRecommendations for action by Government for committee to consider:default3.8.1 
defaultWhat I outline below are a number of 
defaultrecommendations
default that will go some way to making inroads on this complex social problem. The 
defaultrecommendations 
defaulthave been proposed to include the input of every social network member, however, more responsibility has been given to schools with support from the government. This is because schools are 
defaulta constant in the white working class pupil’s lives
default and can represent a source of stability. In addition, schools have an understanding of the benefits of educational attainment and therefore have value to add in the process of raising aspirations for white working class pupil’s attainment. Finally, school
defaults are 
defaultconduits to local HEI
defaults and other organisations
default that 
defaultprovide
default aspiration-raising activities. 
default3.8.2 C
defaultorrect
default identification and
default targeting to ensure that white working
default 
defaultclass 
defaultpupils
default are included in widening participation activities is vital for their 
defaultaspi
defaultration raising
default. 
defaultSchools are constrained in their decisions regarding who should attend events by the importance of academic attainment. This submission has already shown 
defaultthat white boys have the lowest academic attainment at Key Stage 4. However, the decis
defaultion not to allow a poor academically performing pupil to attend events needs to be weighed up against the benefit and impact on aspiration and motivation that this could have. 
default3.8.3 
defaultCatalysts, such as specific widening participation activities for talking
default about 
defaultaspirations
default have a fundamental impact on 
defaulteducational outcomes
default. Ultimately, no 
defaultexposure to 
defaultcatalyst
defaults
default results in
default pupils
default no
defaultt
default 
defaultdeveloping and 
defaulttalking about 
defaultaspirations 
defaultwith
default network members, which in turn results in no reflection
default on the part of the pupils
default and what they
default fundamentally
default want to achieve in life
default and how important educational attainment is
default. It is not just the case of having catalysts, but also planning for how to make the most of the activity after the event, to encourage the 
defaultpupils
default to talk and r
defaulteflect on their experiences. This is where the real value of the widening participation experience 
defaultis 
defaultheld
default,
default 
defaulta
defaults such, planning for catalysts needs to be viewed holistically, so that maximum benefit can be gained. As catalysts for 
defaultaspiration
default talk generally t
defaultake place within the school environment, then the school along with the HE outreach teams must work together on these. Planning should include how 
defaultall
default network members could also contribute to the process of talking 
defaultt
defaulto the pupil.
default3.8.4 Teachers 
defaultobviously
default va
defaultlue the benefits of 
defaulteducation
default and therefore this value could be included and extended into the classroom in a planned approach, through the role of continuing professional development
default (CPD)
default.  The outcome 
defaultof CPD 
defaultwill 
defaultbe to 
defaultemphasise 
defaultthrough teachers 
defaultthat 
defaulteducation
default is a normal course of action and that 
defaultpupils
default could benefit from 
defaultattaining well in it
default. However, resources and training need to be provided to teachers working in schools 
defaultwith disadvantaged students 
defaultwho 
defaultpotentially 
defaultpresent
default a highly complex and chal
defaultlenging environment. 
default3.8.5 Schools working with white working
default 
defaultclass 
defaultpupils
default would benefit from the employment of a dedicated graduate, preferably a young white working
default 
defaultclass 
defaultperson
default from the local area who ‘made it’ to university. This graduate would act as
default a role model, whilst also undertaking a student mentor role. The student mentor would be in a position to understand and appreciate the complexities and constraints of the pervading social characteristics which impact upon 
defaulteducational attainment
default. This ini
defaulttiative of employing a young graduate as a student mentor has been successfully used with a number of schools and 
defaultone of the schools in my study 
defaultself-funded this role for two years, during 2009-2010, prior to cuts in the education budget, which 
defaultunfortunate
defaultly 
defaultresulted in this post being removed. 
default3.8.6 The study itself added value to the boy
default’
defaults 
defaultattainment
default process and it had a powerful influence as the boys had their voices heard. The boys said that they had benefitted from participating in the study as it boo
defaultsted their self-beliefs and made them feel that they were clever enough to 
defaultcontinue with their education, therefore giving them a reason to attain at school
default. Adding to the role of the student mentor, could be the formation within school, and supported by H
defaultEIs, of inclusive white working
default 
defaultclass groups which allow the 
defaultpupils
default to have their voices heard whilst discussing questions about their future decisions and career choices. This approach has the potential to unintentionally stigmatise the 
defaultpupils
default, however th
defaultis has to be weighed up against the benefits of forming this group, to 
defaultincrease educational attainment from this group
default. Ultimately, this group would support the 
defaultpupils’
default aspirations, growth and emotional development whilst boosting their self confidence, th
defaultat they could ‘make it’ 
defaultwithin their chosen field
default.
default3.9 defaultConclusionsdefault3.9.1 
defaultIn conclusion, 
defaultI would like to highlight that there is still much to be done in order to increase the educational attainment of white working class pupils. One such way is to develop 
defaulta partnership approach, whereby members of the pupils network work together in order to support their aspirations and to draw upon the social capital held within the network to 
defaultenhance
default the
defaultir educational attainment prospects
default. 
default The government’s role is pivot
defaultal in supporting networks to make a difference to the educational outcomes of white working class young people. 
defaultReferencesdefault&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default8
default&#xa0;
default