Written evidence submitted by Mind (LAI 0074)defaultIntroduction 
defaultMind responded to the government’s consultation on Transforming Legal Aid.
default  
defaultWe remain deeply concerned about the impact of the government’s current proposals upon people who experience mental health problems, one of the most vulnerable groups in society, who experience high levels of discrimination and some of whom may be at risk of compulsory detention and treatment under the Mental Health Act 1983 if they do not receive community care and support they need. We consider that these proposals will have a 
defaultdisproportionate effect upon our beneficiaries as they include people who do not have the resources or capacity to act as litigants in person.
default 
default Our beneficiaries include people who are more likely to be affected by decisions of the state as they may require health or social care services or at times may rely on welfare benefits.  
defaultIt is contrary to human rights and the UN Convention on Rights of Persons with Disabilities to limit the ability of a class of people accessing legal assistance to secure the care they need for their mental health conditions and to challenge the discrimination and mistreatment they experience.
defaultPrison Law scope cutsdefaultRestrictions in legal aid will mean that prisoners can no longer obtain legal advice in relation to matters such as discrimination, visiting, transfers
default,
default and access to healthcare and to community care for rehabilitation.
defaultIt is universally accepted that prisoners have a higher rate of mental health problems and that detention itself has an adverse effect on mental health.
default They are also at increased risk of suicide
default.
defaultMind does not advise on prison law but the Mind Legal Advice line receives letters from prisoners who tell us that they are not able to access the care and treatment they consider they need. They write to Mind for advice because they are distressed by the way they are being treated in prison and they consider this may be because of the symptoms they exhibit 
defaultarising from 
defaulttheir mental health conditions.
defaultWe consider that this proposal will put vulnerable prisoners
default,
default including those with mental health problems
default,
default fluctuating capacity or cognitive disabilities
default,
default at a serious disadvantage as they will not be able to enforce their rights, contrary to the provisions of the Equality Act 2010
default,
default Article 14 of the European Convention on Human Rights and Article 12 and 13 UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities.
defaultOur other major concern is that the proposals will
default still
default reduce availability of specialist prison law advice
default as the scope of prison law has been narrowed, although we understand that the government has agreed that the specialist category of prison law may remain. 
defaultPrisoners with mental health problems can have complex needs and do require specialist advice.
default 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultIntroduction of a residence testdefaultWhile the government’s concession in relation to detention cases is to be welcomed
default, Mind considers that this proposal still compromises the principle of equality before the law. We also note that the Ministry of Justice is unable to quantify the savings that this 
defaultchange would result in 
defaultand so it is not possible to assess the justification for this proposal.
defaultMind is very concerned that people who lack capacity to litigate or to make decisions about their care, treatment and residence
default,
default or have fluctuating capacity or cognitive disabilities
default,
default remain subject to this test. Mind’s experience is that people may require legal representation to gain access to 
defaultthe 
defaultcommunity 
defaultcare 
defaultservices and accommodation they need to stay well. The mental healthcare system is coercive and if a person deteriorates for want of adequate care in the community then they are at risk of being taken to a place of safety by police 
defaultand this may mean being confined to a police station for up to 72 hours 
default(section
default 
default136 Mental Health Act 1983). They may also be detained in hospital and subject to compulsory treatment under Mental Health Act
default 1983
default (e.g. s.2 and 3 Mental Health Act 1983). People who failed to meet the test would have no redress for actions for unlawful detention and 
defaulttortious
default claims arising from unlawful use of restraint and assault.
defaultMind, together with other members of PLINGO (Public Lawyers in Non-governmental organisations) 
defaultwas
default advised by Michael Fordham QC, Ben 
defaultJaffey
default and Ravi Mehta that this proposal is 
defaultun
defaultlawful and th
defaultat opinion was forwarded to the Ministry of Justice with our initial response. 
default&#xa0;
defaultProposal that providers of legal services in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid for work done on the case if the Court grants permission to proceeddefault.
defaultMind does not consider that there is evidence to justify this proposal which will deprive vulnerable people of an opportunity to hold public authorities to 
defaultaccount.
default 
defaultWe 
defaultare persuaded by
default the research and analysis that Public Law Project prepared 
defaultin relation to judicial review 
default. A legally aided claimant has to exhaust other remedies before being granted legal aid and
default has
default to satisfy the Legal Aid Agency of 
defaultthe merits of their claim so there is already a stringent filtering process operated in relation to legal aid being granted for judicial review for any claimant.
defaultJudicial review is the chief means by which the executive and public bodies are held to account. People with mental health problems or cognitive disabilities are one group 
defaultin society 
defaultwhose lives are greatly affected by decisions made by public bodies and for them this remedy is particularly important. 
defaultCorrespondingly this section of society includes people least able to litigate in person or even understand their rights.
defaultMind is aware that it is often only with the assistance of a lawyer who issues judicial review proceedings that a person with a mental health condition gains access to the healthcare services in hospital or the 
defaulthealth, 
defaulthousing or social care that they need in the community. 
defaultWe are concerned that the
defaultse
default proposals:
default&#xa0;
defaultIt will therefore disproportionately affect people with mental health problems as their needs for community care, hospital treatment,
default 
defaultspecialist care packages, accommodation and support means that they are more reliant on public body decision-making. Also, they are less able to act as litigants in person and are more often excluded or discriminated against in decision making.
default 
defaultComplaints procedures do not offer a solution to a person who needs an urgent remedy such as access to a vital community care service, appropriate accommodation or essential healthcare treatment. 
defaultRemoval of borderline merits test criterion.default&#xa0;
defaultWe disagree with the reasoning in this proposal. As the Ministry of Justice accept ‘ borderline’ cases are often high priority cases which involve holding the 
defaults
defaulttate to account or public interest cases. While these are likely by definition to be cases where it is harder to assess the prospects of success, it is important that they are brought. One example would be disability discrimination claims that raise 
defaultnew 
defaultquestions of law that affect others with the same or similar disabilities
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default27 September 2013
default4
default&#xa0;
default See the statistics from The 
defaultRt
default Hon Lord Bradley, 
defaultThe Department for Health The Bradley Report : Lord Bradley’s review of people with mental health problems or learning disabilities in the criminal justice system
default April 2009 in our initial response. 
default  Mind ‘s Information Unit estimates   
defaulton current figures for the prison population in December 2012 the suicide rate is 2 per 1000 prisoners (.22%) while the rate for England in the general population is 0.01% .The figures for 2012 are on the government website.
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prison-population-2012
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Annexe B: Response to consultation  p87 
defaultpara
default 125.
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/transforming-legal-aid-next-steps
default