WWC0018defaultBuckinghamshire County Council and the Buckinghamshire Learning TrustdefaultAndefault inquiry into underachievement in education by white working class children.default&#xa0;default1)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe extent of white working class pupils’ educational underachievement.default1.1.
default 
defaultWe share
default the Government’s concern about the underachievement of children and young people from a white working class background and young people. We would argue that this should be a strategic priority from early years through to higher education. However,
default 
defaultit is o
defaultur view that  this is a difficult question to answer empirically as the group und
defaulter discussion do not exist as a 
defaultclearly identifiable statistical cohort.
default&#xa0;
default1.2.
default 
defaultW
defaulthile we cannot separate out children and young people from a white working class background we can 
defaulta
defaultnalyse achievement for children in receipt of Free School Meals. 
default 
defaultAn analysis of three years of data for Buckinghamshire by FSM for white British boys and girls, compared to all boys and girls with and without FSM shows is that:
default•
default              
defaultFor non-FSM pupils, at bo
defaultth Key Stages 2 and 4, White British are above or at the average for all FSM pupils
default•
default              
defaultFor FSM pupils, the same is broadly true at KS2, although there was a dip for WB pupils in English in 2011
default•
default              
defaultFor FSM pupils at KS4, generally the White British pupils are
default below the overall average for FSM.
default•
default              
defaultThere is a very big gender gap for FSM pupils both in English at KS2 and overall at KS4. This applies overall and to White British pupils, with girls outperforming boys.
default1.3
default. Therefore
default the worst performing group are Wh
defaultite British boys with FSM at KS4. In 2012 only 24% attained 5+ A*-C 
defaultInc.
default E/M, (White British girls 41) - both are lower than the overall average for FSM pupils (28% boys, 44% girls), which as we know was in itself very low. Results for WB FSM boys went dow
defaultn from 2011 to 2012, results for girls went up. 
default1.4. However, we 
defaultwould
default caution
default about using eligibility
default for free school meals as anything more than a proxy indicator for this issue. There will be significant number of children who may be classified as work
defaulting class 
defaultusing
default other indicators who are not 
defaulteligible
default for 
defaultfree
default school meals and a further group 
defaulteligible
default for Free School Meals who would not b
defaulte categorised as working class.
default Using free school meals also excludes 
defaultexamining the
default impact of underachievement in 
defaultEarly Years.
default1.5. In 
defaultPublic H
defaultealth, when looking at the impact of measure to stop people smoking, they defined a working class cohort by lo
defaulto
defaultking at 
defaultcategories of 
defaultemployment – in this case 
defaultroutine and manual workers.
default1.7.
default 
defaultRecommendation
default: to target intervent
defaultions at a group who would be identified as White Working Class, there is a need for a nationally adopted statistical definition which enables analysis of achievement and the impact of interventions. 
default2)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe factors responsible for white working class pupils’ defaulteducational underachievement, including the impact of home and family.default&#xa0;
default2.1.
default 
defaultWe are convinced that factors in families and communities have a significant impact on patterns of educational achievement from Early Years onwards.
default 
default2.2. 
defaultThe research
default published in 
defaultA Long Division
default (IPPR 2012)
default and elsewhere showing that schools can make 20% difference to narrowing gaps but that factors outside school lead to 80% of any gaps in achievement. In projects such as th
defaulte Aylesbury Standards Project (
defaultASPIRE) and 
defaultinterventions in Chesham, we are also working to develop family and community support for learners. 
default2.3. 
defaultWe would not want to generalise about the factors in families and communities that lie behind the impact of families and communities on the achievemen
defaultt of white working class children. 
defaultOrganisations
default such as The Roundtree trust and researchers such as Steve Strand have explored this issue. 
defaultWe would also commend the background papers supporting the 2013 Ofsted 
defaultUnseen Child
default particularly 
defaultthe paper
default by Dennis
default Mongon, 
defaultEducational Attainment: White British Students from Low Income Backgrounds
default (DfE 2013).
default2.4. Mongon identifies school interventions that make a difference:
defaultWe are using these three areas a
defaults
default cornerstones of our work to raise achievement for white working class and other underachieving groups.
default2.5.i  Discussions with Secondary Headteachers have recommended that consideration is given to th
defaulte different challenges for rural and urban students from a white working class background. The impact of relative deprivation by comparison with the community you live with is distinct from being member of a community where a larger number are from a simil
defaultar social and economic context. This can be ,manifest in a more significant lack of aspiration and less experience of, and belief in,  the possibility and potential of social mobility. 
default2.5.ii. School leaders felt that we do not know enough about the impac
defaultt of social change on rural white working class learners. More needs to be done to understand the effect of changes in the ethnic 
defaultmake-up of rural communities and the increased success and prosperity of young people form ethnic minority backgrounds. There 
defaultis a hypothesis that white working class communities  is a rural environment may be less well integrated into patterns of social change that are accepted in urban communities and, as a result, are less well equipped, and less positive about,  social or geo
defaultgraphical mobility
default2.6. We
default interviewed Headteachers from three
default Aylesbury Primary schools 
defaultwhich serve less advantaged communities
default. In 2011/12 each of these schools
default 
defaulthad
default a
defaultn
default achievement gap for students eligible for FSM 
defaultthat wa
defaults 
defaultboth
default 
defaultnarrower than
default national or 
defaultwhere this cohort achieve
defaultd
default more highly that other pupils in the school
default.
default 
defaultThey were unanimously of the
default view that, as well as providing  a good quality of teaching and learning,  their success 
defaultwas the result of
default  a strong and cohesive pastoral care system that
default supp
defaultorted
default children
default in such a way that they were ready to learn when they we
defaultre in the classroom. 
default2.7.i
default.
default The importance of pastoral support was echoed by the secondary sector. Here it was argued that the achievement of all students from less advantaged backgrounds could be, and is
default, enhanced
default by an on-going, targeted, evidence based focus on removing barriers 
defaultto 
defaultlearning and
default aspiration. 
default2.7.ii. This would include a relentless focus on monitoring attendance, working in partnership with families, engaging with health professionals to support physical and mental health, with the police in targeting support for at
default risk students and promoting restorative justice. 
default2.8 It is our view that those working in education from the earliest years to the end of the secondary phase need to work to engage with families and communities, to know the families in the communities th
defaultey serve and to build powerful relationships.
default2.9. It was felt that changes to the Ofsted framework over the last 18 months have reduced the significance and celebration of high quality pastoral care as a pre-requisite for student achievement, particularly
default 
defaultfor
default children and young people from less advantaged backgrounds.
default&#xa0;
default3)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhether the problem is significantly worse for white working class boys than girls.default3.1. The data on FSM reflects the experience of schools that the issue is more pronounced 
defaultfor boys
default and gir
defaultls, but girls do, nonetheless, present cause for concern.
default&#xa0;
default4)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat steps schools can take to improve the educational outcomes and attainmendefaultt of white working class pupils?default4.1. We are supporting and promoting the interventions championed
default by the Sutton Trust, 
defaultthe Education Endowment fund
default and 
defaultin The
default Unseen Child
default report and 
defaultits
default supporting papers
default. These are a key element of our strategies to ensure Pupil Premium has an impact on standards and on narrowing the gap
default for all underachieving groups
default.
default4.2. We also believe
default that investing in good relationships with families and communities and strong pastoral care for children are key strategies.
default4.3. We are convinced of the importance of early intervention and of coherent, joined up provision and collaboration between early
default years, primary and secondary phases across communities. 
default&#xa0;
default5)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe potential for a wider range of educational approaches, for example vocational pathways, to improve outcomes for white working class pupils.  default5.1. 
defaultAn issue identified by schools and other educational professionals is the need for a greater celebration of a wider range of success and achievement. 
default5.2
defaultCurrently, success is defined according to levels of educational achievement with a dis-
defaultprop
defaulto
defaultrtionate
default 
defaultfocus on access to selective universities. 
default5.3.i. 
defaultWhile we fully endorse and 
defaultsupport attempts to raise aspirations and widen participation in further and higher education and selective universities we would also argue that developing a successful career o
defaultr business or developing the skills required for manual or craft based work is equally important for a balanced society and a balanced economy. 
default5.3.ii.
default 
defaultAs such we would be supportive of any plans to raise the profile of apprenticeships and work based trai
defaultning that ensures young people are prepared both for a specific line of work but also have the independence, confidence and adaptability to change in response to evolution in the work place or changes in demand for skills.
default6)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat role Government can play in defaultdelivering improved educational outcomes for white working class pupils. default&#xa0;default6.1.
defaulti)
default 
defaultDevelop 
defaulta nationally adopted statistical definition 
defaultof white working class learners 
defaultwhich enables analysis of
default 
defaultachievement
default and progress, the identification of areas where underachievement is most pronounced
default and the 
defaultanalysis of the 
defaultimpact of interventions
default 
default6.1.
defaultii) Raise the profile of pastoral support to address emotional or behavioural barriers to learning to support the impa
defaultct of high quality teaching and learning
default6.1. 
defaultiii) C
defaultontinue to support the collation and dissemination of evidence based good practice as has happened with  the Sutton Trust materials to support the use of the pupil premium.
default6.1. 
defaultiv) R
defaultecognise and celebrat
defaulte a wider range of successful outcomes of education raising the status of work and work based training at the same time as ensuring those who choose this route has a high quality educational support to ensure they can adapt to changing labour trends and te
defaultchnological developments
default6.1. v) Share and facilitate the development of best practice in building strong links between schools and communities they serve, including the development of parental hubs in schools, education programmes for parents and an incre
defaultased focus of the role of parents as key partners in early years education.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default