Inquiry into the ‘Underachievement in Education by White Working Class Students’default&#xa0;
defaultSummary default&#xa0;
default1. Summary of submission
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Future Leaders Trust default&#xa0;default2. The Future Leaders Trust 
defaultwas established in 2006 with the mission of eradicating educational inequality by developing a network of leaders for challenging schools. Working in partnership with
default the National College for Teaching &amp; Leadership, 
defaultw
defaulte deliver a leadership development programme, which
default recruits high potential teachers and middle leaders, places them in a senior leadership role and supports them to headship in a challenging school. We now
default have over 400 Future Leaders who are working as senior leaders throughout England 
default(
defaultwith 5
default9
default having now reached headship
default)
default and who are leading schools in some of the most deprived areas of the country.   
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat steps can schools take to improve the educationdefaultal outcomes and attainment of white working class students?default&#xa0;
default3. One of the solutions to improve the educational outcomes and attainment of white working class students is to raise their aspirations. This can be evidenced by looking at a case study from one
default of our participants, David Burton. David Burton took over Sir John Thursby Community College in 2012 and since becoming headteacher 
defaulthas worked to raise the aspirations of the students at his school and build a network of support and opportunity around the
defaultm. Over his short time as headteacher David has improved attainment in 5+ A*-C GCSEs (including English and maths) from 38% to 48%
default and 
defaultreduced
default the proportion of NEETs from the school to 0%. This is despite a very challenging context. In the town of Burnley
default 
defaultthere are particularly high levels of out-of-work benefit claimants among 18-24 year olds
default and at the school there has historically been a po
defaultor academic record with 5+ A*-C GCSEs (including English and maths) below the floor target for the past two years.   
default&#xa0;
default4. White working class students are a group who have benefited significantly from the additional support David has put in place. They oft
defaulten arrive at the school with very low levels of prior attainment – particularly in English – and with several years of educational underachievement already behind them. Mirroring national trends, it is the white working class boys who begin their time at t
defaulthe school with the lowest level of attainment. 
default&#xa0;
default5. Upon taking his headship David put in place a Career Development Adviser (CDA) aimed at helping students think and prepare for their future. As the majority of the white working class students at the scho
defaultol come from communities with few people in work, often their sources for information are limited when it comes to thinking about life after school. There is little point asking students “what do you want to do when you leave school?” as their response is 
defaultoften reduced to the employment held within their family. Instead, the CDA spends time with each student to discuss their skill set, their current academic progress and the opportunities available. It is the school’s aim to have every student leave with a 
defaultjob, an apprenticeship, or a university place. With 0% NEETs, to date this has been an enormous success.
default&#xa0;
default6. Complementing the CDA is a school-based recruitment agency, which David established to challenge the perception that there weren’t any opportunities in Burnley. Set up with a local recruitment agent it is located at the very centre of the school. A live
default vacancy board is regularly updated and a group of ten students – known as The Dream Team – have been trained to assist their peers with applications for apprenticeships and jobs. Each term a different industry is showcased to broaden the students’ horizon
defaults and so they can see the range of professions within fields – for instance within engineering there are human resources, IT, finance and administration as well as engineering itself. As the recruitment agency has grown in size not only are students applyi
defaultng for opportunities themselves but some are starting to take these home to their parents and encouraging them to apply.  
default&#xa0;
default7. In addition to the career support provided, David has also worked to raise the aspirations of his students. The expectations he a
defaultnd his staff have of all students are now higher and he has worked to overcome the negative perceptions they have of themselves. A mentoring programme is one mechanism for achieving this and has been of great benefit to the white working class students. As
default parents are involved in the mentoring from the outset, it has also allowed them to be more engaged with their children’s education. Despite perceptions and the impression white working class students give that their parents aren’t interested in their educ
defaultation, David has always found that parents are desperate to have their children succeed so they don’t end up in similar positions to themselves. As David stresses, the most important part in this process is engaging with and talking to families, particular
defaultly as most feel severely marginalised by society and hold a degree of resentment that, through immigration and socio-economic change, opportunities have been taken from them and their families. 
default&#xa0;
default8. While David’s work is ongoing
default,
default some significant gains hav
defaulte been made at the school to the benefit of the students and their families. As the success of alumni continues to grow
default,
default David hopes the students will create a network of their own, sharing their knowledge and experiences with one another and raising aspir
defaultations further.  
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultOur research into the work our participants are doing to improve the educational outcomes for white working class students
default, 
defaultand the success they are having with different practical interventions, is ongoing and we would
default be happy to sh
defaultare this with the Select Committee should you think this is useful.  
default 
default              
defaultWhat role can Government play in delivering improved educational outcomes for white working class students?default&#xa0;
default10. As an organisation
default,
default we work to ensure that we reach the most challengi
defaultng schools in England where the level of deprivation is high and academic attainment low. As our network has grown we have placed headteachers and senior leaders in areas with high numbers of white working class students such as Grimsby and the Isle of Wig
defaultht. As our organisation focuses on expanding further into coastal and rural towns we hope to have an even greater impact on these students. To this end, we continue to support 
defaulttransparency of information and data from government to enable us to identify an
defaultd target schools where the attainment of white working class students is of concern. 
default&#xa0;
default11. This submission is not to advocate that David’s ideas be implemented nationwide – rather, we believe that more passionate and outstanding school leaders such as Davi
defaultd should be placed in posts where their efforts can have the most impact. David, like other excellent school leaders, is prepared to intervene rather than accept the status quo, and that is what is needed in order to improve
default 
defaulteducational outcomes for white 
defaultworking class students. We would therefore welcome any support the Government is able to give to help exceptional school leaders move to high priority areas in order to drive sustainable improvements for these students. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default              
default D
defaultepartment for Education 
defaultPerformance Tables
default 2012 and provisional GCSE results 2013.
default 
default Office for National Statistics, Of
defaultficial Labour Market Statistics: Labour market profile: Burnley (Nomis; 2012) [accessed via 
defaulthttp://www.nomisweb.co.uk/reports/lmp/la/1946157091/report.aspx?town=burnley
default (26 August 2013)].
default