&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Information Commissioner’s Office [OLS0052]default&#xa0;
defaultThank you for giving the Information Commissioner’s Office 
default(ICO) 
defaultthe opportunity to submit evidence 
defaultto your inquiry. Your inquiry is timely, given that the abuse of 
defaultchildren via the 
defaultonline services 
defaultthey use 
defaultis 
defaultbecoming a matter of increasing concern. 
defaultWe should explain that as the regulator for the Data Protection Act 1998 (the 
defaultDPA
default), our statutory interest in this matter lies in the processing of personal data. This takes place where, for example, a company hosts information that identifies someone on i
defaultts website or where one individual posts information about another on a social networking site. However, as we explain later, our ability to police postings done by private individuals is 
defaultreally 
defaultvery limited.  
defaultIn our submission we have decided to focus on
default a limited number of key areas, rather than to explore all the data protection issues that can arise in the context of 
defaultchildren’s 
defaultonline safety. These are:
default&#xa0;
default1. The DPA’s domestic purposes exemption.defaultSection 36 of the DPA says that personal data processed by an individual only for the purposes of that individual’s personal, family or hous
defaultehold affairs (including recreational purposes) are exempt from the data protection principles and other parts of the Act. 
defaultThis means, for example, where one child posts information that is inaccurate (and quite possibly hurtful and malicious) about anothe
defaultr as part of a personal online spat, there is nothing 
defaultaction the 
defaultICO can
default take against the child that posted the information – i.e. we cannot use our normal powers
default to order the correction of the inaccurate data. 
defaultHowever, the 
defaultorganisation that hosts the information cannot itself benefit from the DPA’s domestic purposes exemption – we discuss the implications of this later. 
defaultThe ICO is not calling for a change to the law here. We recognise the importance of the current exemption
default in terms of individuals’ freedom of expression and their need to process personal data for their own reasons without the threat of regulatory intervention.  We also recognise the 
default- 
defaultperhaps insurmountable
default -
default logistical challenge of the ICO being expected to
default police 
defaultthe enormous amount of personal data that private citizens post about each other through social-networking and other means. We doubt if any organisation could take on this task effectively.
default We also recognise that organisations running services such
default as social networking sites 
defaultcannot be expected to check all the information that individuals post about themselves or each other. 
defaultIt seems to the ICO 
defaultthat the best way to protect individuals who are the victims of abusive postings is for the online servic
defaulte industries – particularly social networking sites and search engines – to be encouraged to develop more effective ways of allowing individuals to have content about them ‘taken down’ or rendered unsearchable. 
defaultW
defaulte recognise the practical problems here in t
defaulthat we do not think it is realistic to expect service providers to vet 
defaultall the 
defaultcontent they 
defaulthost
default,
default and recent relevant case-law would generally seem to support this approach. 
default(See for example the recent Court of Justice of the European Union: 
defaultAdvocate Gener
defaultal’s Opinion in Case C-131/12
default, 
defaultGoogle Spain SL, Google Inc. v Agencia Española de Protección de Datos, Mario Costeja González
default. Note the final judgement here has not yet been handed down.) 
defaultHowever, we do think ‘the industry’ should do 
defaultmore 
defaultto be responsive 
defaultto the wishes of 
defaultprivate 
defaultindividuals to have content about them moderated where it is clearly
default causing them distress. (This is quite different to public figures being able to hide negative stor
defaulti
defaultes about themselves.)
default 
default 
defaultHowever, we are aware of the legal 
defaultuncertainty and technological difficulty here.  We know from our own experience of dealing with determined, well-resourced individuals with access to a great deal of legal and technological resource that, once posted, it may be impossible to remove informa
defaulttion from the internet effectively.
default 
defaultContent taken down from one site often ends up being posted on another. 
defaultHowever, we believe that it is often possible to limit the damage caused by information posted online, if not to eliminate it completely. 
default 
defaultWe urge t
defaulthe industry to do more to develop more effective means of facilitating redress for aggrieved individuals. 
defaultWe hope that as the information age develops
default,
default the legal landscape will become much clearer in terms of the responsibility of online service providers
default 
defaultfor information 
defaultthat they host
default,
default but which private individuals post. We also hope that the technologies that are so impressive in terms of making content searchable and accessible can be used to protect individuals in respect of content that should never h
defaultave appeared online in the first place. ICO will continue to engage with ‘the industry’ to further these objectives. 
defaultICO has recently published guidance on social networking and online forums – it is available here: 
defaulthttp://www.ico.org.uk/for_organisations/guidance_index/~/media/documents/library/Data_Protection/Detaile
defaultd_specialist_guides/social-networking-and-online-forums-dpa-guidance.ashx
default2. Privacy notices and explaining personal data issues to children and othersdefault‘Privacy notice’ has become the prevalent term in the UK and elsewhere for the information 
defaultthat 
defaultorganisations are required by law to make available to people to tell them, in short, what will happen to any information they provide to an organisation. This is clearly an important component of online safety for children and other
defaults
default because a properly dr
defaultafted, accessible privacy notice should allow individuals to make properly-informed information-choices.  A privacy notice 
defaultmight allow a child to decide not 
defaultto
default provide his or her personal information to a particular website because of the way it intends to
default use the information. 
default 
defaultP
defaultrivacy notices can only take us 
defaultso
default far 
defaultthough,
default 
defaultand we suspect that privacy notices largely go unread by adults, let alon
defaulte
default children. However, for older, more mentally competent children they do have a part to play – provided they ar
defaulte truthful, accessible
default, explain the implications of using a service in a particular way
default and 
defaultare 
defaultwritten in language that 
defaultthe
default service’s intended users – or their parents or guardians 
default- 
defaultcan understand.
defaultPrivacy notices can be particularly useful when combined
default with relevant privacy-choices. This might be the case where a user cannot navigate through a website unless he or she actively agrees – or declines to agree – to a particular use or disclosure of his or her personal data. However, as we have said, this on
defaultly takes us 
defaultso 
defaultfar and it is unrealistic to expect younger children to make meaningful choices here – although obviously parents or guardians could do this for their charges.  
defaultThis is also why it is
default extremely
default important that services aimed at – or 
defaultavailable
default to – children are offered with privacy-friendly default settings. This would mean, for example, that service users have to make an active decision to share information about themselves
default, rather than the sharing 
defaulttaking place
default unless it is ‘turned off’. 
defaultThe I
defaultCO very much favours a ‘privacy by default’ approach, particularly where children’s data is concerned. 
defaultWhere services are aimed at children
default,
default perhaps more important than the privacy notice is the underlying fairness, safety and transparency of the service 
defaultbeing offered – regarding matters such as the disclosure of personal data to third parties, or its use for marketing purpose
defaults
default.
default 
defaultWe certainly encourage the development of industry best-practice in the area of online services aimed at children, so that there 
defaultis no confusion – or any unpleasant surprises – when a child uses one of these services. 
defaultClearly, marketing that takes place on sites aimed at children should be age-appropriate. 
default3. Age verification.defaultOne approach 
defaultto the protection of children online is to prohibit certain organisations from offering certain types of service to children below a certain age. (This is the approach proposed in the European Commission’s data protection reform package.) We can see the ap
defaultpeal of the approach in terms of its simplicity – 
defaultsocial networking sites should not be allowed to offer their services to 
defaultchildren under 13
default, for example. However, this approach 
defaultis fraught with practical difficulty and do
defaultes not tally well with the UK’s leg
defaultal system which generally relies on a child’s competence, rather than just his or her age, in order to assess whether he or she can make a decision about something. (That said, age-restricted goods are denied to individuals purely on the basis of their age
default, a
defaultlthough we know from ‘bricks and mortar’ contexts how relatively
default easy
default it is for individuals under 18 to obtain alcohol, for example.
default)   
defaultHowever, it is clear that children of the same age have different levels of understanding, and that even quite young
default children might be able to make informed choices over relatively straightforward propositions. We do think that a too rigid, age-based approach could unfairly restrict children’s take up of on-line services and could deny them the informational learning ex
defaultperiences that will stand them in good stead in later life. 
defaultWe also recognise the
default perhaps insurmountable
default difficulty of introducing a reliable online age verification system – or a 
defaultrobust 
defaultsystem for obtaining authentic parental consent
default. We are concerned that the introduction of such systems could result in service providers collecting large amounts of ‘hard’ personal information about children and their parents – information they would not ordinarily collect. 
defaultIn terms of age verificati
defaulton, we know that i
defaultt is 
defaultusually 
defaultvery easy to register as a user on a site based on a fake identity. A 12 year old can pretend to be 21 and set
default 
defaultup a profile on most social networking sites. As a result, children have been able to find their way onto sites th
defaultat were intended for adults and vice versa.
defaultAt first glance, governments, child protection agencies and parents may be pacified by the promise that a single technology will dramatically reduce their child’s risk online and protect them from inappropriate s
defaultites and 
defaultun
defaultsavoury characters on the Internet. However, the reality is that age verification is very difficult because a nationally available infrastructure is not available in the UK. If parents and policy architects focus solely on social networking sites, or any s
defaultingle technology solution, then the mark for 
defaultinternet 
defaultsafety 
defaultwill be 
defaultmissed.
defaultThere is no quick fix or silver bullet solution to child safety concerns around age verification, especially with the ever changing digital landscape. Tools are available for stak
defaulteholders to promote and encourage better, safer online collaboration and communication for children
default.
default 
defaultH
defaultowever, the reliance on a single technology or approach has limitations and possibly is unworkable. 
defaultWe suggest a
defaultn alternative strategy 
defaultof 
defaulta layered approa
defaultch deployed alongside educational advice, 
defaultappropriate 
defaultparental 
defaultresponsibility and supervision
default, mentoring children in using the Internet safely, ISP involvement, industry protocols, 
defaultwebsite
default developers embedding age verification and most importantly 
defaultusing th
defaulte full range of existing
default legislation 
default– including data protection law - 
defaultto 
defaultprotect children effectively.
default (We have not majored here on the undoubted importance of parental responsibility and supervision. However, we recognise that this is becoming more diffi
defaultcult to provide as we move away
default rapidly from the shared family PC to the personal portable device.)
defaultThe Internet offers countless benefits and learning opportunities for children. It lays the foundation for communication opportunities that ha
defaultve
default never been 
defaultexperienced by mankind in our history. Because of the endless benefits it is in society’s best interest to help as many children get online. However, we must 
defaultnot focus too much
default on age verification as a potential silver bullet
default, but rather
default focus on a layered
default approach
default,
default allowing children to become ethical, resilient citizens and contributing towards society in a positive manner.
defaultChapter 2 of the ICO’s ‘Personal Information On-line’ code of practice contains more information about the ICO’s approach to children’
defaults personal data. It is available here: 
defaulthttp://www.ico.org.uk/for_organisations/data_protection/topic_guides/online/personal_information_online
defaultIt is worth noting that the European Commission’s proposal for a new data protection regulation has several provi
defaultsions intended to protect children’s personal data. In the original text a child was defined as any person below the age of 18 years. However this definition has been removed from the latest draft. 
defaultICO’s
default activities fall into to two basic types – enforcement and education. 
defaultWe will not go into 
defaultall
default the aspects of our enforcement activity here. However, we do have powers that can require organisation
defaults
default processing
default personal data about children to change their p
defaultractices in order to comply with the requirements of data protection law. We can also serve a civil monetary penalty of up to £500,000 for a breach. We deal with relatively few enforcement cases relating to children’s data – although a growing problem seem
defaults to be ‘scam’ text messages being sent to individuals – including children – where the recipient is
default invited to
default call a particular premium-rate number in response. Dealing with this type of problem is a major element of our enforcement activity.
default ICO has bee
defaultn very active here 
default– we submitted evidence and 
defaultappeared recently before your Committee to 
defaultdiscuss the problem of spam messages. Please follow this link for more information about the ICO’s work in this area:
default 
defaulthttp://www.ico.org.uk/news/blog/2013/more-progress-in-fight-against-cold-calls-and-spam-texts
default 
defaultW
defaulte would urge parents, teachers - and of course children themselves - to bring it to our attention when they believe that information about children is being collected, used or shared 
defaultinappropriately, or where there is evidence that it is not being kept suf
defaultficiently secure, for example. We are confident that well-targeted enforcement activity could help to encourage good practice across the board and to marginalise companies that do not handle children’s data with sufficient respect. 
defaultIn terms of the educati
defaulton of children in respect of their information rights, the ICO has been extremely active over the years and plans further activity in the future. 
defaultIn January 2013 the ICO commission
defaulted a set of education materials
default covering information rights that were 
defaultinten
defaultded to give 
defaultteachers a creative and engaging set of lesson plans for use in the classroom. The objective has been to raise some key issues with children and young people, so that from a young age they can become aware of their information rights, understan
defaultd the potential threats to their privacy, and know how to protect themselves on the internet and elsewhere.
default This is still at an early stage but we are pleased with the initial results. 
defaultAfter pilot lessons at several schools throughout the UK in March and 
defaultMay 2013, nine lesson plan outlines – five for primary schools, four for secondary - have been fully developed and are made available from the ICO’s website www.ico.org.uk/schools.
default 
defaultSince August 18 2013
default,
default 
defaultover 
default3800
default 
defaultof these education packs 
defaulth
defaultave been download
defaulted
default. 
defaultPre and post lesson evaluation among Key Stage 4 pupils attending High Storrs School in Sheffield showed that awareness of how to protect personal information increased from 59% to 75%, following the lessons. 
defaultWhen appointing the supplier to produce th
defaulte materials, the ICO insisted that they were designed and developed by teachers still working in schools today and, crucially, were tailored to specific areas of the national curriculum.
defaultThe lesson plans explore what is meant by personal data, what 
defaultinforma
defaulttion 
defaultcan be shared and wh
defaultich information 
defaultchildren should keep safe. The activities help teachers introduce children to their rights and responsibilities relating to data protection and freedom of information, and 
defaultexplain 
defaultwhere to go for help if they have a
default concern. The materials allow teachers flexibility in their approach and encourage active learning, with many opportunities for students to discuss and question. 
defaultThere are five lesson plans for use in Primary Schools. They are:
defaultLesson Plan 1 – What is per
defaultsonal 
defaultinformation?
defaultLearning objective: Children will understand what is meant by ‘personal information’.
defaultLP2 – Who needs to know and why
default? 
defaultLearning objective: Children will consider the personal information that it might be appropriate to provide to a gi
defaultven person.
defaultLP3 – Opting out 
defaultLearning objective: Children will become aware of how to ‘opt out’
default from particular uses, sharing etc. of their information
default. They will understand that information they provide could be used for a variety of purposes.
defaultLP4 – 
defaultHow to react to unsolicited messages
defaultLearning objective: Children will consider how they should react to unsolicited emails and text messages that request personal information.
defaultLP5 – Rights and Regulations
defaultLearning objective: Children will understand that
default laws and regulations exist to protect us and to give us the right to access appropriate information.
defaultThere are four lesson plans for use in Secondary Schools. They are:
defaultLP1 – Strictly Private – what is personal data
defaultLearning objective: By the end of the 
defaultsession, students will be able to:  
defaultLP2 – Private versus public
defaultLearning objective: By the end o
defaultf the session students will:
defaultLP3 – Is there something I should 
defaultknow? 
defaultExercising our rights 
defaultLearning objective: By the end of the session students will:
defaultLP4 – No secrets – Freedom of Information
defaultLearning objective: By the end of the session students will:
defaultWe are very proud of our achievements thus far in terms of educating children about their information rights and informational safety. We are convinced that the education of
default children about these issues is crucial in terms of giving them the informational self-defence they will need as children and of course as adults. It is all too easy for children just to provide their details when asked to do so online, or to subscribe to 
defaulta service because they want the ‘goodies’ 
defaultwithout thinking through the privacy implications of their actions. However, we are confident that our educational outreach work will help to foster the critical, questioning attitudes that children’s online safety
default depends on to such a great extent. 
defaultWe thank the Committee for the opportunity to provide our views on this extremely important topic. We will of course be happy to provide any further information it requires from us. 
defaultThe point we would like to reiterate 
defaultis that the issue of children’s safety online is a complex and multi-faceted one. There is no single solution and the best we can do is to make sure 
defaultthat the various organisation – including the ICO – that have a responsibility in this area prioritise the 
defaultprotection of children and co-ordinate their efforts to reduce the risks and enable the benefits of the online world for young people. 
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default