&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultUkie [OLS0058]default&#xa0;defaultAbout UsdefaultThe Association for UK Interactive Entertainment (Ukie) is the trade association that represents a wide range of businesses and organisations involved in the 
defaultgames and interactive entertainment industry in the UK.
defaultUkie exists to make the UK the best place in the world to develop and publish games and interactive entertainment. Ukie’s membership includes games publishers, developers and the academic institutions
default that support the industry. We represent the majority of the UK video games industry; in 2011 Ukie members were responsible for 97% of the games sold as physical products in the UK.  Ukie is the only trade body in the UK to represent all the major games co
defaultnsole manufacturers (Nintendo, Microsoft and Sony). 
defaultWe are an Executive Board Member of UKC
defaultCIS and sponsored the hugely successful UKCCIS Summit in 2011. The video games industry has taken a leading role in the field of child safety, both online and offli
defaultne, and continues to do so, as we outline in detail below.
default&#xa0;
defaultKey points:default&#xa0;
defaultProtecting minors from adult content – our tdefaultrack defaultrdefaultecord of defaultrdefaultesponsibilitydefaultThe games industry has a long record of taking a responsible approach to child 
defaultsafety, by giving parents the tools to control what games their children play, and how and when they play them. Our most important tool has been the PEGI
default (Pan-European Games Information) age rating 
defaultsystem. PEGI operates through a principles based code of 
defaultpractice, against which content providers across the EU self-declare their practice. A content rating is given by designated national games rating authorities (NICAM and the UK’s Video Standards Council), who independently review and monitor self-declarati
defaulton. The PEGI system itself is also overseen by a number of independent bodies.
defaultPEGI has been in place
default in the UK
default on a voluntary industry basis since 2003, when it replaced an earlier UK-only system.
default It operated alongside BBFC ratings, but having two systems
default was confusing for consumers.
default 
defaultSo 
defaultin July 2012 PEGI became the sole legally-enforceable UK age rating system for games. As a result it is now a punishable offence to sell a game rated 12, 16 or 18 to a child below that age.
defaultAll major games consoles incorpor
defaultate robust parental controls to ensure that these age ratings can be easily enforced in the home. Different manufacturers offer different degrees of control and functionality, but generally they all have the ability to:
default&#xa0;
defaultThese parental controls are password prote
defaultcted
default and usually offered on an ‘active choice’ basis when the console is first booted up
default.
defaultAt the launch of PEGI as the legal UK age-rating system in July 2012, Ukie’s members funded a major awareness-raising campaign, under the title Control.Collaborate.Cr
defaulteate, educating parents both about the PEGI system, parental controls and about wider issues around children and video games.
defaultOur Control.Col
defaultlaborate.Create. campaign covered
default the following key themes:
defaultAt the heart of this campaign was the re-launched website 
defaultwww.askaboutgames.com
default, which is designed 
defaultpri
defaultmarily 
defaultto help families understand games. This website prominently features a section linking parents to advice on setting up parental controls for all commonly-available gaming devices, including all major consoles, hand-held devices, and mobile platforms
default.
defaultThe askaboutgames site also plays an integral part in delivering the wider campaign’s messages with information and tips for consumers, and showcases of how playing video games is a collaborative and creative experience.
defaultOur campaign had 300 significant 
defaultmedia hits, across the BBC, ITV, C4, C5, Sky, national print, games press, regional papers and radio and national online outlets.
defaultAskaboutgames.com has 20,000 visitors 
defaulta week 
defaultsince its re-launch in July 
defaultlast 
defaultyear. We also distributed more than 50,000 leafl
defaultets promoting our safe and sensible gaming messages via Game and HMV stores. 
defaultA
default survey of over a thousand parents
default was
default conducted in July 2012 for the 
defaultstart of our campaign to support PEGI. This found that 
default35.9% 
defaultof parents who own games consoles 
defaultuse parental
default controls, either regularly or occasionally
default, whilst 40% of parents kno
defaultw that parental controls exist
default for video games but do
default not use them because they already
default supervise
default their children’s game-playing and d
defaulto
default not allow their children to own or play inappropria
defaultte games.
defaultIn total, 92.5% of parents whose children played games were aware of the parental controls that existed for those games on the consoles on which they are played. 
defaultWe do not have previous data on these questions, so we cannot claim to know any tre
defaultnds. However, it is clear that at least three quarters of parents know about the availability of parental controls for games and feel informed enough to have confidence i
defaultn deciding whether to use them.
defaultThis makes intuitive sense – many of today’s parents t
defaulthemselves grew up playing games, and have a strong understanding of the medium itself. It also indicates that, although education efforts should of course continue, there is already a strong understanding of the dangers of games both online and offline. 
defaultA
defaults a result of this strong experience with parental controls and age ratings, Ukie took a leading role in the UKCCIS Parental Controls work-stream
default and was part of the strong push for an active choice approach, reflecting the good track record such an approa
defaultch has on games consoles.
default&#xa0;
defaultProtecting children in onlinedefault and mobiledefault environmentsdefaultPEGI has been recognised by the UK government as a leading example of an industry taking a responsible approach 
defaultin
default keeping children away from unsuitable content, and 
defaultalso 
defaulthas 
defaultstrong recognition amongst UK parents.
default It 
defaulthas 
defaultnow 
defaultexpanded into the online games market through PEGI Online. As part of the rating process online game providers must indicate if their gaming environments fulfil rigorous PEGI Online requirements which are s
defaultet out in 
defaultarticle 9 of 
defaultthe PEGI Code of Conduct. These are:
default9.1 
defaultRated Content
default:
default Products offering Online Ga
defaultmeplay Environments operated by 
defaultSignatories will, where practicable, be appropriately rated under the PEGI System. This provision will not apply to ga
defaultme content which is posted on the Online Gameplay Environment operated by the User but which is not under the User’s control, such as user-generated content. 
default9.2 Removal of Undesirable Content
default:
default Signatories shall use their best endeavours to ensure that On
defaultline Gameplay Environments are kept free of content which is illegal, offensive, racist, degrading, corrupting, threatening, obscene or might permanently impair the development of minors.  When Online Gameplay Environments also contain 
defaultuser generated conte
defaultnt, Signatories shall use their best endeavours to immediately take down any such content which is illegal, offensive, racist, degrading, corrupting, threatening, obscene or might permanently impair the development of minors. Observance of all the foregoin
defaultg should, where possible, also include removal of undesirable links or ‘hyperlinks.’ 
default9.3 Appropriate Reporting Mechanisms
default:
default Consistent with the foregoing paragraph, Signatories will ensure that appropriate reporting mechanisms are in place to allow players
default to notify Signatories of the existence of content such as described in the previous sub-section within any Online Gameplay Environment.
default9.4 Chatrooms:
default Signatories should take reasonable precautions to ensure that Online Gameplay Environments which allow v
defaultoice or video chat, protect children from access to age-inappropriate content introduced by other users.
default9.5 Other Operators:
default Signatories shall use their best endeavours to ensure that operators of Online Gameplay Environments offered by Products published
default by the User and which are authorised by, but not under the control of, the User, abide by these rules and/or subsequently become Signatories themselves.
default9.6 Safety Warnings
default:
default Signatories shall advise users of Online Gameplay Environments under their contro
defaultl of the desirability of taking occasional breaks from Online Gameplay.  
default9.7 Community Standards:
default Signatories shall ensure the incorporation in their terms of business with users of Online Gameplay Environments of certain provisions usually included under the heading of so called ‘community standards’. These provisions will contain prohibitions agains
defaultt those users introducing content or indulging in online behaviour which is illegal, offensive, racist, degrading, corrupting, threatening, obscene or might permanently impair the development of minors.
default9.8 P
defaultrivacy:
default Any User engaging in the online collecti
defaulton of personal information from subscribers will maintain an effective and coherent Privacy Policy fully in accordance
defaultUkie work closely with PEGI to ensure that this system works for games companies, and to continue strengthening and improving it
default.
defaultUkie me
defaultmbers offer many different types of online game and work to implement tailored safety controls that are appropriate for the different experiences and audiences those games provide.  
defaultThose may include, among other things, information on safe gameplay, such 
defaultas taking breaks, or tools to set time limits, chat filters, codes of conduct.  See, 
defaultfor example,
default 
defaulthttps://eu.battle.net/account/parental-controls/index.html
default.
defaultPublishers of g
defaultame worlds aimed at younger children 
defaultregularly tailo
defaultr 
defaultcontrols 
defaultto account for that audience’s unique needs
default. An excellent example is 
default“
defaultMoshi Monsters
default”
default, the global success creat
defaulted by UK developers Mind Candy.
defaultChildren playing Moshi Monsters can post content o
defaultn pin-boards, which is automatically filtered for inappropriate content. Furthermore, children can only see the pin-boards of the people they invite into their network, which can only be done if the other child’s username is known. This helps to ensure tha
defaultt children are only in contact 
defaultwith people they already know. 
defaultThese are just examples of 
defaultthe ways in which 
defaultonline
default game providers are leading the way in allowing children and young adults 
defaultto interact safely online, while
default having lots of fun.
defaultMobile Games - 
defaultPEGI for APPS
default and IARC
defaultThe rise
default of smartphones and tablets as gaming platforms has been a vital part of the evolution of the games industry in recent years. 
defaultPEGI for APPS, a rating procedure specifically designed for small software applications, including
default but not limited to games, was launched in 2012 to address this important market shift. It is designed to cater specifically to the needs of app developers and digital platform operators. It is not a new rating system, it is a more flexible and tailor-made
default procedure that allows mobile or digital platforms to use the classic PEGI rating system as it is known from boxed products and online titles. On top of that, it adds new feature descriptors that inform a consumer about certain types of functionality in an
default app. Currently, PEGI for Apps is used by Microsoft on Windows 8 and Windows Mobile platforms.
defaultAlthough app platforms still have local storefronts for customers it 
defaulthas become clear that 
defaultpublishers are in need of a one-stop-shop to get all age classificatio
defaultns for their products in one streamlined process. Therefore, an international working group, including rating boards from Europe, US, Australia, Brazil and others, is working on a global solution under the name of IARC (International Alliance for Rating Co
defaultntent): a list of questions that combines all the criteria of the different rating boards across th
defaulte globe into one big flowchart.
defaultPEGI for Apps has been part of this project from the start. The IARC program will provide for a streamlined submission proces
defaults in order to produce classifications for all participating regions at the same time. Although depending on cultural differences, these ratings may vary the system provides a publisher with a single, robust solution and takes away a lot of hassle. IARC is 
defaultexpected to be launched at the end of 2013.
default&#xa0;
defaultInternet Filters – Significant Risk defaultof defaultOver-BlockingdefaultWe have particular concerns about the 
defaultpotential for unintended consequences from the universal internet filtering that was announced by the Prime Minister in 
defaultJuly.
defaultUkie have always supported an ‘active choice’ approach to parental internet controls, as emphasised in our response to the DCMS consultation on the issue last year. The approach being 
defaultproposed
default, where controls will be 
defaultswitched
default on by default
default,
default goes a st
defaultep beyond this.
defaultWhilst the protection of children is of course paramount, 
defaulthaving controls in place by default  
defaultgreatly increases the importance of ensuring that they are 
defaultwell targeted
default and do not 
defaultinadvertently 
defaultblock 
defaultor restrict access to content that is not
default in fact inappropriate for children
default.
defaultWe understand that discussions are still taking place with ISPs, and that the final design of the filters is not in place. However, the only example already in place is the filtering that Talk Talk offer to all customer
defaults under the HomeSafe brand, and we have specific concerns about this system. 
defaultAccording to the Talk Talk website promoting their HomeSafe technology, parents are given a list of categories of ‘inappropriate websites’ from which they can select which to blo
defaultck. These different categories are:
defaultThe inclusion of ‘Games’ in such a list is deeply troubling to our industry. 
defaultW
defaulte recognise the value to parents of controls enabling them to restrict access to 
defaultgames that contain 
defaultmature
default 
defaultcontent (
defaultfor example
default when they are 
defaultPEGI 
defaultage rated 18)
default if they choose to do so
default, as 
defaultunder
default existing parental controls systems, but 
defaultsimply
default filtering out all games 
defaultis
default a
defaultn extremely
default blunt approach that 
defaultwe believe is unnecessary
default and
default disproportionate
default,
default 
defaultand 
defaultcould potentially have 
defaultvery 
defaultadverse effects on the UK games industry
default.
default It should be noted that only a small proportion of games are age-rated 18
default. In 2012, for example, just 9.4% of PEGI-rated games received an 18 rating.
default Indeed, in the last ten years just 5.7% of games rated were PEGI 18.
defaultThis
default proposal
default seems to ignore the difference between the content and the medium. It would be absurd to have 
defaultan option for websites about ‘books’ or ‘films’ to be classed as inappropriate by their nature, without regard to the content, nature or rating of the individual products. It is equally wrong for the same to be applied to games. 
defaultWe strongly disagree with 
defaultthis approach, and are discussing it actively
default with Talk Talk to learn how it 
defaultis applied and what impact it is having.
defaultWe are very 
defaultconcern
defaulted
default that 
defaultfiltering “games” as a category of inappropriate websites 
defaultcould be
default held up as an example of best practice: it m
defaultust not become government policy that this should be adopted by all ISPs. 
defaultWhile the industry agrees that
default the protection of children is 
defaulttantamount, 
defaultthe solution should be tailored appropriately to address the specific concern and not be so overly broad that
default it will have extreme and inappropriate consequences.
defaultThe potential commercial risk is clear:  if a large portion of the UK population had all websites related to games blocked from their internet connection automatically, the impact on the games industry 
defaultcould be significant.  More importantly, this filtering would block content that is well outside the scope of 
defaultthe adult material that this program seeks to address.
defaultFor example, application of a broad filter for all “games” will create a 
defaultsignificant risk t
defaulthat 
defaultgames specifically intended for young people, including 
defaulteducational games
default,
default will be 
defaultautomatically 
defaultblocked by filters targeting those issues.
default 
defaultThe game industry does not believe this is in the best interest of UK children or 
defaultsomething
default that parents want or need.  This is evidenced in the statistic used earlier in the document that 40% of parents are aware of the parental controls that exist on their games consoles and choose not to use them, as they are already confident that they have 
defaultsufficient control over their children’s habits. There are a large number of well-informed, technologically savvy parents in the UK, and blocking access to games websites without their consent would do great damage to the system’s credibility. 
defaultWe strongly
default recommend that, as the government works with each ISP on implementation of the new filters, it does not promote the inclusion of ‘games’ as a category of inappropriate websites. 
defaultAdditionally, even filters that more specifically target content about “dati
defaultng,” “drugs” or “alcohol,” may have unintended consequences that are detrimental to children.  For example, a game teaching children about sexual health, drug addiction or other issues is likely to be caught by the filters and so inaccessible to the childr
defaulten it is designed to help. 
defaultMany of these games can be discovered on sites which are not explicitly labelled as “education” or “charity”, in order to be discovered organically by the young people they are targeted towards
default, making it even more difficult for 
defaultfilters to intelligently detect and allow them
default.
defaultMuch greater information is needed on how the filters will work in practice, 
defaultincluding 
defaulthow quickly incorrect blocks on websites can be reported and removed.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultThe PEGI (Pan-European Game Information) system is a set of ethical standards in the format of a Code which reflect the industry’s commitment to 
defaultact 
defaultin a responsible manner towards children. The Code’s
default main aim is to provide parents with objective, intelligible and reliable information regarding the minimum age for which a given product is deemed suitable, but the Code also deals with related advertising and promotion, consumer redress &amp; sanctions, comm
defaultits members not to offend human decency and, after its merge with the PEGI Online Safety Code, now also aims to provide a safe online gaming environment for children.
default 
defaulthttp://www.peg
defaulti.info/en/index/id/1068/nid/media/pdf/390.pdf
default p13
default Ibid.
default