&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Eric and defaultEsmedefault defaultBricknelldefault [OLS0062]default&#xa0;
defaultWE SUPPORT THE CULTURE MEDIA AND SPORT COMMITTEE IN THEIR CONCERN THAT THE INTERNET NEEDS TO BE A MUCH SAFER PLACE FOR YOUNG PEOPLE AND INDEED, FOR defaultEVERY ONE OF US.defaultMy wife and I
default write 
defaultas mature
default citizens
default and active grandparents
default who have considerable family responsibili
defaultties – towards our children, 
defaultgrandchildren
default and the wider community
default. 
defaultWe support the Inquiry which we believe
default could lead to greater
default 
defaultprot
defaultection,
default safety 
defaultand co
defaulthesiveness
default 
defaultin t
defaulthe family setting
default. 
defaultWe believe there are many parents, concerned about what their children can access on the internet, who would love to have some kind of filter to protect them, even from unintentional access to 
defaultdefiling material, but don’t have the know-how to install it. By providing such protection by default, the Government will protect these vulnerable households.
defaultWe 
defaultwrite as having 
defaultparticipated 
defaultin the governorship of an independent
default school – Focus School, Bra
defaultmley 
defaultCampus
default -
default responsible 
defaultfor the safety and welfare of successive 
defaultannual 
defaultintakes of school children
default,
default entrusted to our care by their parents and guardians
default.  
defaultT
defaulthese young people
default are our future – the developing potential who will give c
defaultharacter and strength 
defaultto our country in oncomin
defaultg years
default.
defaultWe acknowledge the tremendous advantage that young people have in being able to access the internet to tap the stores of information. They can use this positively in their education to produce intelligent responses to ques
defaulttions in any of their subjects.
default Thus they
default develop intellectually and academically
default.
default We should however 
defaultprotect them during their 
defaultyears of study so that they keep
default their minds fresh and
default clear
default focus
defaulting
default on academic achievement and developing into responsible adu
defaultlts. Nothing will debilitate and detract more than 
defaulthours of 
defaultoccupation with 
defaultonline programs which arouse
default lust and 
defaultcan lead to 
defaultimpure relationships.
defaultWe write as
default Christian
defaults, treasuring
default the message of the Holy Bible
default -
default the word of God – it provide
defaults light to ou
defaultr path and shows what’s right and what’s
default wrong.
default 
default Two
default very simple,
default brief example
defaults
default from scripture:
default in his letters to Timothy,
default a younger person,
default the apostle Paul 
defaultsays
default 
default‘Keep thyself pure’ (1Tim 5 v23) and ‘B
defaultut youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness...
default’
default 
default(2 Tim 
default2
defaultv22)
default.
default These injunctions 
defaultwould 
defaultpowerfully support 
defaultthe expressed concerns of the CM and S Committee.
defaultAnd
default then
default I write as having 
defaultsome 
defaultyears of experience in Health and Safety 
defaultat my workplace
default; you
default identify hazards, eliminate or reduce them and ensure 
defaultthat residual risk is managed
default for the health and safety and well-being of all concerned.
default The Government
default has a DUTY OF CARE, expressed
default 
defaultinitially in
default legislation, to eliminate as far as possible the 
defaulthazards of moral and physical corruptiondefault, defaultwhich are
default to be fo
defaultund on the internet.
defaultSo
default 
defaultwe are 
defaultvery 
defaultconcerned about the danger lurking
default only a few clicks away 
defaultfrom every child 
default– what 
defaultis regarded 
defaultas legitimate adult material is defiling and damaging
default, especially
default to the minds and 
defaultmorals of young people
default – and a very large percentage of our young have viewed such material before they have reached the age of 16
default!
defaultIt is most disturbing to see that while the Government 
defaulthas legislated to protect under-
defaultage persons from the sal
defaulte of tobacco products, alcohol, 
defaultdru
defaultgs, knives etc, they are left to their own devices when exploring the internet – and less than half of parents have taken the trouble to install filters on their home IT equi
defaultpment to protect their children!
defaultWE FULLY SUdefaultPPORT THIS MOVE BY THE GOVdefaultT defaultCULTURE MEdefaultDIA AND SPORT defaultCOMMITTEE TO INTRODUCE POLICY CHANGES AND TO INVEST IN RESOURCES OF A TECHNICAL NATUREdefault,default AND POLICINGdefault,default TO RESTdefaultRdefaultICT THE TOO EASY ACCESS TO ADULT MATERIALdefault.defaultWE SUPPORT DEFAULT BLOCKING OF ALL ADULT CONTENT AS THE STANDARD SETTING ON ALL INTERNET defaultENABLED DEVICES SOLD IN THE UK TO STOP CHILDREN SEEING WHAT IS NOT SUITABLE.defaultWE ASK FOR THE PROVISION OF BETTER AGE-VERIFICATION SOFTWARE defaultWE SUBMIT THAT WE AS MATURE AGED PEOPLE ARE RESPONSIBLE TO ACT TO PROTECT OUR YOUNGSTERS – DO NOT TAKE THE EASY OPTIOdefaultN OF defaultALLOWING default‘FREEDOM OF CHOICE’default.default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember
default 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default