&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultProf Andy defaultPhippendefault [OLS0068]default&#xa0;
defaultContextdefault&#xa0;defaultI have been involved in research around online safety for over 10 years and work very closely with 
defaultorganisations such as the 
defaultUK Safer Internet Centre and 
defaultSouth West Grid for Learning 
defaultas well as many schools across the country
default. This work, over the years, has encapsulated issues of identity and trust, school policy and practice around online safety, onlin
defaulte safety problems faced by 
defaultchildren
default and young people and how 
defaultour understanding of these
default have changed over the years, and the impact of new technologies on behaviours. 
defaultI work with young people from primary age up to higher education. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn all of my researc
defaulth a fundamental aspect is being able to discuss these issues 
defaultat a grass roots level 
defaultwith young people themselves. While we might have additional data collection mechanisms such as survey work, the core of any research project will be sitting with young peo
defaultple, usually in groups, talking about the research questions and their thoughts. This is all conducted within a clear ethicial framework working alongside schools to place the young people in a safe, non-judgemental environment where they are free to share
default opinions and reflections without being challenged or confronted. Parental consent is obtained for any young people spoken 
defaultto,
default they are fully briefed on the research context, and have the right to withdraw from the discussions at any time. 
defaultWhile these disc
defaultussions can sometimes centre on difficult issues, such as sexting, pornography and 
defaultgender, I usually find the discussions very open and productive (we don’t ask young people to disclose about their own behaviour, but to ref
defaultlect on the behaviour of peers). 
defaultI also work with stakeholders in the online safety area, such as parents, teachers and social care professionals to understand their attitudes and concerns related to online safety and young people. 
defaultA recent example of this work was a piece of research con
defaultducted by the NSPCC/UK Safer Internet Centre around sexting
default. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition to research practice, I am also involved with a lot of schools in an educational context, delivering assemblies and classes related to online issues and associated behaviours. Whi
defaultle this is not formal research work it further allows the exploration of online safety with young people in a qualitative setting and can elicit interesting and rewarding discussions. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAs well at the work above, all of which is available in the public dom
defaultain, I am currently involved in 
defaultthree
default qualitative 
defaultstudies that
default, while not yet published, may have relevance to this inquiry. These studies are:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIn presenting a response to the CMS Committee Inquiry 
defaultinto Online Safety, I 
defaultw
defaultill draw from all of this work to place context around my responses. 
default&#xa0;
defaultClearly the online world is something with which the vast majority 
defaultof young people 
defaultare engaged and use on a daily basis (indeed, the differentiation between the online and offline is of
defaultten something young people do not acknowledge, it is simply “life”). 
defaultIn agreement with the specified i
defaultnquiry brief, one thing I can observe through many years working in this area is that public understanding of the issues involved in “being” online has 
defaultim
defaultproved
default and we have moved on from the traditional threats such as “stranger danger” to a realisation of a complex 
defaultenvironment requiring multi-stakeholder 
defaultinput and 
defaultperspectives. In addition, within the field we have moved away from the belief that young peo
defaultple are simply passive participants needing protection 
defaulttoward an awareness of
default fully engaged digital citizens who need to be 
defaultmindful
default of the impact of their own behaviours on others as well as awareness of the risks involved 
defaultliving in
default the online world.   
default&#xa0;
defaultD
defaultigital risk can take many forms, from those well established such as grooming to sexting, cyberbullying/online abuse, accessing inappropriate content and trolling. However, in ensuring protection from harm we must also 
defaultestablish a balance with 
defaultrights to freedom of expression and access to legitimate content and interaction. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAs someone who has worked in the field for a long time, it is encouraging to see Parliament engaging with these issues in recent time. However, a lot of recent policy discu
defaultssion around this topic has focused on a very specific aspect of online life – access to adult content and the measures needed to ensure young people cannot see this. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMore concerning is that this dialogue seems now to have grouped access to clearly illeg
defaultal content (child abuse images) with access to legal content for 
defaultadults which is
default inappropriate
default for minors. These are two very separate issues and it is not helpful to be presenting them in the same context – countermeasures to tackle child abuse images are
default clearly set in law and addressed by excellent organisations such at the Internet Watch Foundation. Child abuse images are illegal and no one has the “right” to access them. However, when we are talking about legal content inappropriate for young people it
default is a far more complex debate as we do not want to restrict the rights of the public 
defaultor ostracise them in some way (for example by suggesting that there is a link between access to legal and illegal content) 
defaultin order to protect young people. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis is a very narrow aspect on online safety at large – what about sexting, cyberbullying, trolling, upset by “innocuous” content, education, the right to discuss these issues in school, etc.? 
defaultIt
default is encouraging to see that this inquiry is, at least in par
defaultt, looking to broaden to Parliamentary debate and to start to ask questions around the wider 
defaultcontext
default. 
defaultThis is something that will be explore
defaultd
default in more detail when addressing the specific points of the inquiry below.
default&#xa0;
defaultHow best to protect minodefaultrs from accessindefaultg adult contentdefaultThere has been much discussion over this point over the last couple of years. The OCC published an excellent, balanced, review of the l
defaultiterature in this area recently
default. 
defaultHowever, I would like to present a slightly different perspective on th
defaultis matter that has arisen from my discussions with young people. Adult content is certainly nothing 
defaultnew,
default it has been available far longer than it has been accessible online. However, the challenge presented in the online world is both accessibility and the
default type of content 
defaultone can now download
default. While 25 years ago magazines and perhaps VHS videos provided a level of access to adult content, it was not as strong or diverse at the availability of pornography online. This is something that has been acknowledged 
defaultby many young people I have spoken to. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI
default was asked over the summer this year by a 14 year old boy what I thought about people his age looking at this sort of content. This is an interesting question to pose because it both acknowledges that young people 
defaultof this age are frequent users of pornography (this has been borne out in my discussions with young people of this age, particularly boys) and also challe
defaultnges the social belief they should not be doing it. My answer was 
defaulthopefully a pragmatic 
defaultone – I would 
defaultrather they didn’t but I wasn’t naïve enough to think they could be prevented from accessing it, so I would rather we focused on providing an environment in schools where they could talk about the possible issues that arise from access to this sort of cont
defaultent. 
default&#xa0;
defaultProtection from access is an interesting concept. How can we protect them from content they wish to access
default (which is certainty something I would observe from talking to boys far more than girls)
default? This, again, was 
defaultreflected
default in discussions recently wi
defaultth a very mature group of 14-16 year old boys in a local school – one boy, who was discussing the recent policy discussions around “opt-in” and filtering in the home, made a very clear statement: “You will not 
defaultprevent teenage
default boys from accessing pornograph
defaulty”. He did not state this to be rebellious or 
defaultcontroversial,
default he was stating it from his observations of his peers. They access and share pornography and have many ways of doing so.
default&#xa0;
defaultMuch of the recent debate has been around filtering
default and it is worth explor
defaulting this as a “solution”, which is clearly is not. Software can only ever provide tools to 
defaultprovide some level of support to
default what are, essentially, social issues facilitated by technology. We have worked with filtering in schools for a long time now and whi
defaultle it is certainly a useful tool to prevent access to inappropriate content in the school setting, it is equally clear that filtering controls have to be set extremely high in order to prevent access to those things the school does not wish their pupils to
default see. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTherefore, lots of innocuous content will be also be blocked which can lead to frustration for both staff and pupils. This is because filtering is still a pretty blunt tool – 
defaultin general 
defaultit looks for keyword and blacklisted sites and prevents access
default as a result. Filtering still struggles with context – the famous Scunthorpe problem being a clear example of this (and some filters wi
defaultll still block this). F
defaultiltering also only blocks the channel on which the technology is installed – in the case of a scho
defaultol 
defaultthis channel would be 
defaultthe institutions network. It will not prevent an ambitious young person with a mobile device handed down from their parents from accessing this content. And 
defaultif 
defaultan individual’s mobile device has been set up to prevent accessing adul
defaultt content, they will have a friend whose device hasn’t and they will share content via Bluetooth, MMS, etc. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOne boy I spoke to recently was more candid when I discussed the recent policy directions with him – he said he doesn’t care whether people preven
defaultt him from accessing indecent images online, he’ll just ask a local girl to send him pictures instead. While this does present a number of issues, notwithstanding a very concerning attitude toward women in general, it does clearly highlight one issue that 
defaultdoesn’t seem to be discussed in the recent debates – online consumption of “professional” pornography is only one source of indecent content for young people. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFiltering will prevent access for those not wishing to find inappropriate content, and as such 
defaultdoes provide some use in this area. 
defaultIf
default we turn our focus to filters in the home it may prevent younger children from stumbling across this sort of content, but will it “protect” 
defaulta determined teen? Also, if filtering in the home is 
defaultgoing to present similar 
defaultoverblocking challenges as those solutions in schools
default, how many homes will switch off the filters because they become too frus
defaulttrating to use and because they prevent access to legitimate content?
default Certainly the Open Rights Group
default (I am on the advisory counci
defaultl for this organization)
default have many examples of adults contacting them because 
defaultof
default filters that, whether on home computers or mobiles, have prevented access to legitimate sites with no means to unblock them. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOn countless occasions young people have asked m
defaulte why they have no opportunity to discuss these issues in school. Many are also critical of what 
defaultlearning
default they do have around online issues in either PSHE or sex education. Rather than 
defaultjust 
defaulttrying to prevent young people from accessing these 
defaultsort
default of things
default, which will always be a game of catch up when they are finding new ways of access, should we not be providing an education environment where these issues can be discussed
default? Shouldn’t we be providing
default a means for reflection and challenge on why society feels
default this content is inappropriate for young people and what the impact of 
defaultaccess might be?
default Sex 
defaulteducation which addresses online issues, inappropriate content, etc. seems to be extremely disjointed and generally delivered by the few specialists we have in this
default area in the UK. I certainly hear very rarely of this sort of lesson being delivered in a school by teachers within the establishment. Yet whenever I have had sessions in schools with both boys and girls around this topic (which can results in very differe
defaultnt conversations) I have found the young people to be engaged and enthusiastic in their discussions and ask to do more of this sort of thing. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSo the barrier is not the unwillingness of the pupils, but the lack of coordination nationally to permit teacher
defaults to address these things in schools. Education in this sort of area requires multi-stakeholder buy in from staff, parents, pupils and policy makers. A lone teacher who believes this is important may subsequently suffer at the hands of 
defaultsenior management, 
defaultp
defaultarents or governors who have received no “permission” to address these topics within the curriculum. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFiltering out extremist material, including images of child abuse and material intended to promote terrdefaultorism or other acts of violencedefaultMuch of the discus
defaultsion above is equally pertinent to this point, filtering cannot be seen as the 
defaultcomplete 
defaultsolution. It is good to see acknowledgement that harmful content online is not just pornography 
default(indeed, in my discussion
defaults,
default young people are far more likely to say they
default have been upset by images of violence or animal abuse than they are by sexual content) 
defaultbut again we need to be clear about 
defaultthe difference between what is legal and what is illegal. If content is illegal, the Internet Watch Foundation (IWF) have a very cle
defaultar remit for reporting, investigating and either blocking or moving for prosecution (depending on whether the content is hosted abroad or in the UK). The IWF maintain a blacklist of sites serving illegal content and all 
defaultISPs within the UK buy into this
default.
default Th
defaulte key
default challenge for the IWF is awareness of their 
defaultrole
default among the public and this could be something that could be 
defaulthelped
default by UK Government. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, when we consider legal, but upsetting, content, we are in more difficult territory if we are looking to fi
defaultlt
defaultering as a solution. Who decides
default what should be filtered? How can we be sure about the meaning and intent behind a search term (for example, if one is searching for extremist materials might use the same search terms as someone conducting research on the
default area)? And is this a sliding scale of upset? I have had many young people tell me how RSPCA adverts have upset them – should we move to block them too? Again, I would rather see a society that, rather than trying, and failing, to prevent access to anythin
defaultg that 
defaultmight
default upset a young people, provides an environment where
default there are aware upsetting content can come in many different forms and affect individuals in different ways and
default if they are upset, they can talk to someone about it. During my work around sex
defaultting I was amazed at how few young people would turn to a te
defaultacher if they became a victim
default. 
defaultThey
default feared a lack of understanding or a judgmental response. That is a real concern because we 
defaultcannot
default possibly consider, and filter, 
defaultall
default content an
defaulty
default individual youn
defaultg person might finding upsetting. To consider young people as a single collective is patronising to the diversity 
defaultand individuality they exhibit and what upsets one may be viewed as humorous or innocuous by another. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPreventing abusive or threatening commdefaultents on social media.defaultFinally, while it is good to see an Parliamentary committee looking at this issue, because when I talk to young people about online issues cyberbullying (or simply “people being mean”) is by far the most likely response whe
defaultn I ask what upsets them online, I would, again, take issue with the wording used. Put simply, you will never 
defaultprevent
default abusive or threatening comments on social media, just 
defaultas
default you will never prevent nasty comments in the playground, on TV shows such as the X Factor, on the football pitch
default or at PMQs
default. However, far more can be done to provide an environment where young people should know they do not have to put up with this sort o
defaultf thing and that 
defaultpeople can
default help. I should stress, first of all, that it is rare that a young person will talk about “cyberbullying” and the term is unhelpful when trying to address the problems caused by people being abusive online. Online abuse can be de
defaultscribed in many forms, such as nastiness, people being mean, calling names, ganging up or simply banter and again 
defaultequitability is difficult to manage in this area – one young person
default’
defaults banter will be considered abuse by another. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, it is important t
defaulthat services providers 
defaultoffer
default the means to report abuse, something that is 
defaultalready in place
default by some social media platforms but not others. Young people also need to be aware that they can use these reporting mechanisms to take comments down and also they wi
defaultll not get into trouble themselves. The wording of some reporting functions is intimidating and can be overwhelming for young people. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBut, once again, education is the pivotal player in this area – education around 
defaultwhat
default is and isn’t acceptable language, 
defaultthe impact of abuse on others, 
defaultthe disconnect
default and perceived anonymity the Internet provides, and the potential 
defaultil
defaultlegality of some forms of abuse. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is also encouraging to see some discussion from the Director of Public Prosecutions and Crown Prosecution
default Service around this 
defaultissue,
default it is helpful to get some clarification on abusive language. It is also encouraging to see it stated it is rarely in the public interest for minors to be prosecuted for this sort of thing.
default&#xa0;
defaultI have seen a number of schools adopti
defaultng a restorative justice approach to the resolution of online abuse issues and this makes sense – in a lot of cases the perpetrator will not be aware of the impact of their words on the victim and to place them in an environment where they can hear about i
defaultt is a powerful one. However, it is important the restorative justice is implemented effectively with trained counselors – it is not something that can be done effectively without experienced professionals. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIn summary, it is encouraging to see this inqu
defaultiry exploring some of the broader issues around online safety and not just focus on the headline grabbing ones. However, it is still a concern that a lot of the language focuses on prevention and filtering rather than education and awareness. The Internet 
defaultis not something that can be “policed” with technology. If we wish to protect young people and help them protect 
defaultthemselves, we can
defaultnot 
defaultlay
default responsibility 
defaultsolely on 
defaultservice providers and software just as we cannot blame the Royal Mail for delivering an unwa
defaultnted letter. We need parents to be aware of issues, we need education professionals to be able and allowed to provide an effective environment to both learn about and talk about these issues, and we need policy makers who are awareness of the broad context
default of online safety and the complexities of growing up in the digital age.  
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.nspcc.org.uk/Inform/resourcesforprofessionals/sexualabuse/sexti
defaultng_wda93252.html
default 
defaulthttp://www.mdx.ac.uk/Assets/BasicallyporniseverywhereReport.pdf
default