&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by British Naturism [OLS0073]default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefaultAs stated by the Committee, the online world poses 
defaulthazards
default,
default ranging from images of child abuse to trolling
default,
default that are the converse of the immense benefits of unimpeded communication and free speech provided by the 
defaultinternet
default, and so any attempt to mitigate harm has to be proportionate and avoid disadvantageou
defaults consequences.
default&#xa0;
defaultBritish Naturism (BN) is the national organisation that represents naturists in the UK. A full description of
default Naturism is on BN’s website 
default[1] but, in short, 
defaultNaturism is the enjoyment of life in every usual way, save that clothes are needed
default only for physical protection.
defaultNaturism contains, among other things, a clear 
defaultbeliefdefault about
default the universality and acceptability
default 
defaultof our one
default true possession—the human body—and its wholeness.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur concerns in the debate about Child Safety Online arise when cons
defaultidering topics such as:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWe deal first with the three issues highlighted by the Committee:
default&#xa0;
default1. Protecting minors from adult contentdefaultWe agree that minors should be protected from some online content, but qualify this
default stance as follows:
default&#xa0;
default1.1 Evidencedefault. Any classification of content as "adult" or "inappropriate" must be based on factual evidence, not on emotion, myth or prejudice. The preferences of an ill-informed, perhaps bigoted, minority cannot be allowed to overrule
default the reasonable attitudes of the majority. For example, some people believe that seeing an image of a naked body is harmful to children, but there is simply no evidence that this is the case. On the contrary, there is much evidence that links prudish attit
defaultudes to the body with high levels of eating disorders, body shame and 
defaultbody anxiety in young people
default.
default&#xa0;
default1.2 Minors.default The use of the term "age appropriate" should not be used in legislation without careful definition. Age verification is used, for example, by gambling websites where the possession of a valid credit card forms both the financial security and implicit veri
defaultfication of the person’s right to gamble. But in the general case of free access to 
defaultunsuitable websites,
default 
defaultit is unclear to us what mechanism could be devised that verifies the age of
default the individual who has made initial access, but does not 
defaultblock the
default unverif
defaultiable 
defaultaccess by
default, say
default, another family member or friend to whom control of the device is passed.
default&#xa0;
default1.3 Filters.default Some filters are centrally defined black lists (e.g. Google SafeSearch), others depend on white lists (e.g. TwoTen). Our opinion is that white list
defaults are feasible for protecting the youngest children, black lists have drawbacks:
default&#xa0;
default1.4 Regulation.default Unlike an industry centred on physical media (films, DVDs, video games) where classification of titles can help the public protec
defaultt 
defaultitself
default from unwanted material, the internet presents a different kind and scale of challenge. By design the internet is constantly growing and changing, so that regulation by any one country is limited to rather crude blocks on major websites
default (usually th
defaultose 
defaultthat authorities consider politically 
defaultdestabilising)
default.
default 
defaultSatellite mediated mobile telecoms will tend to dissolve national boundaries 
defaultand render such 
defaultcontrol
defaults less effective
default. The suggestion that Ofcom could perform a role like that of the BBFC is clearly 
defaultinfeasible, and the suggestion that Ofcom can set attainable standards for filtering and for age verification is probably 
defaultnot practicable either.
default&#xa0;
default2. Filtering out extreme material (e.g. images of child abuse, and information promoting terrorism and violendefaultce)defaultWe understand "extreme material" principally to mean content that is already defined as illegal, and we expect that ownership of and access to such content should be prevented by legal means. Organisations such as the Internet Wat
defaultch Foundation already 
defaultprovide 
defaultservice
defaults that identify
default such dangers, as do i
defaultnvestigators in the Police and s
defaultome charities that have protection in their aims. To the extent that filtering can be made to work, such material should continue to be blocked internationally.
default&#xa0;
default3. Preventdefault abusive and threatening comments on social mediadefaultWe are concerned about the misuse of social media by irresponsible citizens (both adults and children), but think that individual occurrences of such abuse should be identified by those closest to perpetrat
defaultors and remedial action taken. Legislation already exists to deal with such obviously anti-social behaviour if it persists and causes harm, and both sanctions and education can follow.
default&#xa0;
defaultReturning to the topics we listed in the Introduction: 
default&#xa0;
default4. Naturists’default use of online methods to maintain and promote natdefaulturismdefault&#xa0;
default4
default.1 Blocking.default ISPs 
defaultand MPOs 
defaultmust not be forced or allowed secretly to make inaccessible any website which contains images of the naked human body that
default 
defaultare not remotely pornographic [2
default]. So, for examp
defaultle, the completely legitimate and informative websites that we and 
defaultother
default naturists use should never be threatened by over-zealous blocking, especially if there is either no channel for redress or only one entailing expensive litigation.
default&#xa0;
default4.2 Libel.default Naturis
defaultm is a popular, accepted and wholesome lifestyle all over Europe. British naturists should not be forced by legislation into an association with pornography. It would be unacceptable for naturist websites to be subject to filters that may be lifted only by
default their legitimate users signing up for or opting into a service that, though dubbed “adult”, is considered pornographic by not only service providers but also by other authorities who increasingly try to monitor individuals’ electronic communications. Inde
defaulted, such a website and its users could in that circumstance consider that they had been libelled,
default 
defaultand initiate legal action.
default&#xa0;
default4.3 Human rightsdefault. Freedom of expression protects the inter
defaultests and images of naturism
default. There are no restrictions of Art.10 rights due to pressing social need in this 
defaultcontext
default. Indeed, there is a Human R
defaultights ruling 
defaultwhich places
default a positive duty on national governments to protect freedom of expression. The current discussions 
defaultabout
default legislatio
defaultn 
defaultgive
default an opportunity to make 
defaultmuch more accountable those large
default corporations that have 
defaultde facto
default monopolies over some aspects of modern life. The 
defaultcurrent
default campaigns to stop Facebook censoring breast feeding illustrate why this is necessary.
default&#xa0;
default5. Prejudice agadefaultinst minority groups (such as naturists) candefault drown evidence which supports themdefault5.1default Largely covered in §1.1 above. 
default5.2default Blocking or filtering material that not only does no harm to children, but is actually useful or necessary to them, is harmful. Indeed, 
defaultsuch blocking would encourage attitudes known to result in 
defaultwidespread
default and often serious damage. A
defaultddition
defaultal
default to §1.1, p
defaultrudish attitudes 
defaultalso 
defaultexacerbate 
defaultbody knowledge related indicators such as teenage pregnancy
default 
default[3
default].
default&#xa0;
default6. Concerns aboudefaultt body image issues in cdefaulthildrendefaultThis subject has see
defaultn much discussion in recent
default years. The overwhelming conclusion is that better education within families and by teachers is needed to mitigate the harmful effects of commercial fashion industry advertising and the concomitant peer pressure experienced by children. BN believes that a 
defaultproper understanding and acceptance of the human body from an early age provides the best background against which such education can be laid. To risk suppressing this kind of basic information from internet sources would not be helpful.
default&#xa0;
default7. defaultSafeguardingdefault edefaultducation in Art, Science, Medical health and Wdefaultellbeing, Sex and RelationshipsdefaultIt 
defaultmust be recognised that it 
defaultis 
defaulthow
default 
defaultbodies are
default shown that matters, not 
defaultwhat
default is shown
default. Legislation must take due account of the social and cultural value of material that happens
default to contains imagery of naked humans. None of the areas listed here is trivial; all may have to refer to the human body as it actually is. Despite the r
defaulteservations 
defaultof some minorities
default, the right to publish and consume such important material is of paramount
default significanc
defaulte to every new generation in our culture and country.
default&#xa0;
default8. ConclusiondefaultIn summary, we look to parenting and education to inform children of the risks inherent in internet use, to established authorities to block illegal content, and to society in
default general to continue to broaden its tolerance of harmless and potentially valuable 
defaultattitudes
default. [4]
default&#xa0;
defaultNotesdefault&#xa0;default[1] 
defaulthttp://www.bn.org.uk/articles.php/_/information/about-naturism/what-is-naturism-r18
default&#xa0;
default[2] Pornography has no universally accepted definition. We tak
defaulte the view that pornography is that sexual material which is in some proven way harmful to society by its influence on adults or children. Thus, accepted sex and health educational material is not pornographic, nor are images of the naked human in Naturist
default,
default 
defaultArtistic, Scientific and Medical
default contexts.
default&#xa0;
default[3] We observe, in UNICEF research on teenage birth rates in the rich nations, a clear correlation between high such birth rates and prudish attitudes across the countries studied. The correlation is
default near perfe
defaultct, the causal mechanisms well underst
defaultood, and the effects large.
default 
defaulthttp://www.unicef-irc.org/publications/pdf/repcard3e.pdf
default  
default&#xa0;
default[4] This submission is part of a continui
defaultng campaign by B
defaultN to help keep N
defaultaturism, its ideals and its value to society
default,
default 
defaultlegitimate and recognised. We would be more than happy to interact with the Select Committee on any of the above issues and opinions or on related ones.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default