&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Academy of Social Sciences (GSH0013)default1default.default default  The Academy of Social Sc
defaultie
defaultnces welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Committee’s inquiry into Government Horizon Scanning
default and wishes to highlight the importance of 
defaultsocial
default sciences in horizon scanning a
defaultc
defaulttivities
default.
default2default.default  defaultThe Academy
default commends the championing of horizon scanning by the Cabinet Secretary and supports the aspiration towards greater joining up of horizon scanning activities across government. The Day review observed that a senior champion was necessary in order 
defaultfor horizo
defaultn scanning to 
defaultbe applied
default 
defaulteffectively and 
defaultstrategically across Departments.
default3default.default  The work strands identified for the 2013 Horizon Scanning Programme are all in areas addressed by research in social sciences:  emerging technologies; emerging economies; changing supply and demand of resources; changing social attitudes of young people;
default the future of demographic change in the UK.
default 
default 
defaultAll of these topics require an understanding of human behaviour and behaviour change in order to meet future challenges.
default 
default4default.default  Social scientists (including Academicians) are already involved in the horizon scann
defaulting activities of the Foresight programmes, working alongside natural scientists and other experts to bring 
defaultevidence
default to policy making in key areas. 
default For example, t
defaulthe Foresight programme on Identities is likely to form a useful backdrop to the strand on cha
defaultnging social attitudes of young people, as it examined the changing nature of identity in the digital age
default,
default and in terms of social plurality with the attendant risks of extrem
defaultism, amongst other relevant aspects
default.   
defaultIn considering changing social attitudes of
default young people and the future of demographic change, issues around intergenerational resource distribution and wider social values are likely to emerge, and to benefit from insights from social science research
default.
default 
default5default. default defaultThe Cabinet Secretary is to be supported
default in horizon scanning work by the Cabinet Secretary Advisory Group (CSAG) which includes Departmental leads from across government, the Head of the Civil Service and the Government’s Chief Science Adviser.  As noted above, social scientists are embedded in 
defaultmany Foresight group
defaults
default, and
default active in research areas of central relevance to the horizon scanning work strands.  This 
defaultactivity
default may be even more effective across 
defaultgovernment
default,
default were a social scientist with oversight across the Departmental and work strands relevant to horizon scanning
default,
default also at the table.
default6default.default  defaultThe Academy of Social 
defaultSciences
default and the Campaign for Social Sciences
default 
defaulthave advocated for
default some time 
defaultfor 
defaultthe reinstatement of 
defaultthe post of Government Chief Social Scientist to draw together social science evidence, research and best 
defaultpractice
default at the highest levels.  The championing of cross-
defaultgovernment
default 
defaulthorizon
default scanning provides yet more impetus for the collation of social science re
defaultsearch to meet strategic aims and indicates a demand for co-ordinated input of social research at the heart of Government.
default7.default defaultThe Academy of 
defaultSocial
default Sciences can draw upon a membership of more than 9
default5
default0 peer-elected Academicians and 
default46
default Learned Societies in t
defaulthe social sciences in order to provide expertise to policymakers, professionals and the public.  We would be happy to contribute further to the Committee’s work on Government Horizon scanning and response to future risks and challenges.  
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default