&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultHouse of LordsdefaultSub Committee B (Internal Market, Infrastructure and Employment)defaultEU action to tackle youth unemploymentdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;default1. Do you think that the EU should be providing funding to Member States to tackle youth defaultunemployment? Does EU action respect Member States' power in the area of social and employment affairs?default&#xa0;defaultWith high levels of youth unemployment across the EU and cuts to welfare in many countries, providing EU funding to help tackle youth unemployment
default is a
defaultn important part of the EU'
defaults "Youth unemployment package". Funding
default of around 
default€
default8bn
default for the "Youth Employment Initiative" is a key part of EU policy to tackle youth unemployment and making
default most of this
default money available in the first two years of the next multi
defaultannual financial framework, by frontloading the funds
default,
default is a welcome move by the European Council and European Parliament. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe can already see the positive impact that EU funding, specifically from the European So
defaultcial Fund, has had regarding support for 
defaultyoung people
default in the current MFF. 
defaultFor example, in 
defaultWales
default, 
default£
default62
default 
defaultmillion (of which 
default£
default33 million comes from the ESF) has helped "Jobs Growth Wales" to support young people aged 16-24 to secure a job
default. The ESF currently supports a number of "youth" projects, to hel
defaultp get young people into work, education and training and the YEI will build on this. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat is important to realise is that a total of 
default€
default8bn will not be enough to combat youth unemployment alone, and that action and additional financing at
default 
defaultMember
default 
defaultState
default leve
defaultl is crucial in order to make a real impact on this growing problem.  Furthermore, it is not only EU funding that can help remedy these problems, but exchanges of best pr
defaultactice with other Member States.   
default&#xa0;
defaultMember States' policies in the area of social and
default employment affairs can be complemented by action at EU level. When we look at the Youth Guarantee Scheme, we see that the EU is setting out broad guidelines, as a result of political 
defaultcommitment
default by EU leaders. These guidelines should be flexible, 
defaultallow the
default possibility for gradual implementation and should be compatible with Member States' policies in this area.
default&#xa0;
default2. How do you think the funds allocated through the Youth Unemployment Initiative and the European Social fund could best be spent?default default&#xa0;defaultFirstly, it's
default vital that the funds allocated to Youth Unemployment Initiative and the ESF complement one another and are used to their full potential. With reference specifically to the YEI, which will be used to support young people not in education, employment or tra
defaultining, there needs to be a certain degree 
defaultof flexibility. 
defaultAccording to the European Commission, t
defaulthe 
defaultpriority of the YEI is to support those regions with a youth unemployment rate
default above 25%. The European Parliament has been pushing to lower this threshold i
defaultn order to benefit more EU regions, particularly those who fall just short of the 25%, which appears to be the case for several 
defaultUK
default regions. Having some kind of flexibility on this specific issue could potentially help a greater number of 
defaultUK
default regions and cou
defaultld have a greater impact on reducing youth unemployment rates. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFunds allocated through the YEI and ESF could be best spent by promoting apprenticeships and traineeships, increasing youth mobility and more generally, improving the transition between 
defaulteducation and work.
default Making sure ESF funds are "match funded"
default by Governments
default is also key to 
defaultensuring the
default success of EU funding for youth
default employment.
default&#xa0;
defaultLooking at some of the projects currently being carried out in 
defaultWales
default, we can see some clear examples of how
default best to spend ESF funds. ESF funds are being invested in apprenticeship schemes for 15-24 year olds; the Young
default Recruits Programme and 
defaultthe Pathways to Apprenticeship
default Programme are two examples that show how ESF funding can have a positive impact on young p
defaulteople
default'
defaults future employment prospects. Programmes such as these not only have an impact on young people trying to improve their future employment chances, but they
default also
default help businesses
default to increase their productivity
default. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default7 October 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default