&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from t
defaulthe Confederation of Passenger Transport UK (CPT)
default (WRT 004)
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultThe Confederation of Passenger Transport UK (CPT) welcomes the opportunity to provide evidence to the Transport Select Committee for their inquiry into 
defaultwinter resilience in transport. CPT would 
defaultbe happy to provide f
defaulturther information 
defaultif it would assist the Committee.  
default&#xa0;defaultFollowing the inclement winter of 2009/10 where substantial parts of the country failed to cope with the pressures the extreme weather placed upon it CPT 
defaultparticipated in and 
defaultprovi
defaultded evidence to the DfT report led by David Quarmby and also the report conducted by the Local Government Association. 
default Our 
defaultevidence 
defaultshowed 
defaultthat where the 
defaultHighways Agency and local authority
default 
defaulth
defaultighways departments had worked in partnership to plan a 
defaultcoordinated response to decide what level of bus services
default could 
defaultbe provided
default,
default and concentrated on delivering that plan
default,
default bus services in those 
defaultareas were 
defaultbetter than where they had been no 
defaultcoordination and 
defaulta 
defaultrather 
defaulthaphazard response by local authorities and
default their road gritting teams. There is now an acknowledgement that roads around bus depots need to be part of the priority gritting routes if bus services 
defaultare to be maintained 
defaulteven when the depots are located in industrial estates and away from main roads.
default&#xa0;
defaultSince then 
defaultCPT 
defaultha
defaults
default asked a number of 
defaultits
default members across the country whether there has been any improvement in communications between the local authorities and the bus companies to draw up winter resilience plans to decide how both parties will react 
defaultshould
default 
defaultsnow and ice 
defaultdevelop 
defaulton the local bus network. The responses have been mixed across the country
default.  F
defaultor example
default,
default 
defaultNorthumbria
default and Arriva now meet more regularly to decide what bus routes they will try to keep operational in a priority order
default,
default whereas 
defaultin 
defaultDerby
default and Derbyshire 
defaultbus routes have dropped off the priority roads list
default.
default The position in 
defaultBristol
default has improved dramatically
default.
default 
defaultBristol City Council and First have agreed on the main roads and bus routes the council will treat as priority routes for gritting and t
defaulthis plan is scheduled for review each October. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe bus companies have also made a number of changes with many now geared up to getting the latest information out to customers through their websites, social media, local radio etc.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is general concer
defaultn that this winter, 
defaultdue to budgetary constraints
default,
default 
defaultl
defaultocal 
defaulta
defaultuthorities may not be able to provide the level of gritting services they have in previous years and 
defaultthat 
defaultthis may impair 
defaultthe ability of 
defaultbus compan
defaulties
default to provide the same levels of services
default.
default The posi
defaulttion
default,
default of course
default,
default will not be known 
defaultunless and 
defaultuntil extreme weather arrives this winter. 
default However, 
defaultCPT expects that at the very least the dialogue on winter resilience plans will continue between local authorities and the bus companies even if only a very 
defaultlimited response is available by the local authority
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013 
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default