Written evidence submitteddefault bydefault defaultBill Ritchiedefault&#xa0;defaultA programme of land reform should be seen as a means ofdefaultextending property rights including ownership, leasing and renting thereby tackling inequality;
defaultincreasing the participation of communities in decision making over land use policy and land use thereby
defaultstrengthening democracy;
defaultusing fiscal and taxation measures to promote specific outcomes thereby providing public benefits and delivering the Scottish Government's Land Use Strategy.
default&#xa0;
defaultLand value tax and land use taxdefaultcould provide powerful tools to guide land ownership and land use change, and provide a valuable and alternative source
default 
defaultof revenue.
default&#xa0;
defaultReforming the law of successiondefaultto allow all children the right to inherit heritable and moveable property has the potential to create smaller
defaultparcels of land and increase the rate of land coming onto the market, especially very large rural land
defaultholdings, thereby accelerating land reform.
default&#xa0;defaultCroftingdefaultis a secure tenure system for extending sustainable land use, creating diverse livelihoods and small scale
defaultlow intensity food and timber production. Measures should be introduced to:
defaultextend 
defaultcrofting
default tenure to all parts of Scotland;
defaultcreate incentives for land owners to create new crofts;
defaultcreate planning guidelines for the creation of new croft housing where new crofts are established
defaultcreate a target of 10,000 new crofts by 2030;
defaultThe Scottish Government (SG) should lead the way by creating crofts, including woodland crofts, on SG
defaultowned land.
default&#xa0;defaultHuttingdefaultcan allow the urban and rural population to benefit from Land Reform through access to land for
defaultrecreational occupation. Measures should be introduced to:
defaultprovide strong political support for the concept of hutting;
defaultcreate incentives to landowners to release land through sale or lease;
defaultcreate changes to the planning law to provide a definition of a hut and reform of the planning law;
defaultcreate changes to the building standards to develop a simple process for obtaining consent to construct huts;
defaultcreate a target of 1,000 new huts by 2020.
default&#xa0;defaultAllotmentsdefaultcan allow the urban population access to land for growing food and recreation. The SG should
defaultprovide strong political support for the expansion of allotments;
defaultcreate a target of 50,000 new urban allotments by 2030.
default&#xa0;defaultThe Land Reform Actdefaultis not working. Measures should be introduced to:
defaultsimplify and streamline the processes of the Land Reform Act (LRA);
defaultextended the scope of the LRA;
defaultamend the LRA  to allow access to the LRA and the Land Fund by properly constituted bodies set up with the purpose of establishing new crofts, small holdings and huts;
defaultsimilar amendments should be made to the 
defaultthe
default National Forest Land Scheme .
default&#xa0;defaultResourcesdefaultThe Scottish Government should ensure that there are adequate resources including financial resources to drive forward a comprehensive land reform programme. A new body should be created to ensure effective delivery of the land reform programme.
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013
default