              
default              
defaultWritten evidence submitted by 
defaultBond and the UK Aid Network
defaultA. Introductiondefault1. Bond is the UK membership body for non-governmental organisations (NGOs) working in international development. 
defaultwww.bond.org.uk
default 
default2. The UK Aid Network (UKAN) is a coalition of UK-based development NGOs working together to advocate for more and better quality aid through joint policy, lobbying and advocacy work.
defaultwww.ukan.org.uk
default 
default&#xa0;defaultB. Summarydefault3. This submission includes analysis and recommendations on the following areas of the inquiry:
default4. We welcome the UK’s continued commitment to delivering 0.7% of GNI as official development assistance (ODA) and the significant strides made in some areas, particularly on aid transparency.  
default5. However there remain some key concerns:
default6. 
defaultDFID should make the updated information and data behind the annual statistics in development figures publically available
default.
default7. 
defaultDFID must remove the opacity around channelling development finance to private sector business through financial intermediaries.
default8. Given the continuing and increasing focus from the Secretary of State and DFID on the private sector, there are some potential concerns about whether DFID has the right mix of staff and the ability to develop the capacity of staff to combine development knowledge and ‘private sector thinking’.  
default&#xa0;
defaultC. Trends in DFID’s expenditure and total UK ODAdefault9. 
defaultDFID’s multilateral and bilateral aid should remain around the current level in keeping with the UK’s commitment to spend 0.7% of GNI on ODA.default  
defaultIn 
defaultMarch 
default2013, George Osborne announced that the UK Government would meet the UN target of spending 0.7% of GNI on ODA
default and continue to meet this commitment into the future (the 2013 budget showed expected expenditure up to 2015/16)
default. Given this announcement, it is expected that total UK ODA volumes will see a significant increase in 2013, following their decline in 2012.
default10. 
defaultDFID should provide more detailed information on non-DFID ODA expenditure. defaultGreater transparency would help to ensure that allocated funds are likely to lead to reduction in poverty.
default11. 
defaultIn 2012, for a second year in a row, the UK’s ODA decreased slightly, with global ODA levels (net of bilateral debt relief) falling by 1.6% to £8.56 billion, according to the OECD DAC preliminary data published in April 2013. A rise in bilateral ODA (of £220 million, or 4%) was more than offset by a significant drop in spending through multilateral institutions (down by £412 million, or 12%).
default12. 
defaultDisappointingly, Africa was disproportionately affected by this decrease, with ODA to the continent (including imputed multilateral contributions
default) down by 7.4% to £3.41 billion, while sub-Saharan Africa saw an even sharper drop, of 9.8%, to £3.07 billion. This disproportionate drop in aid to Africa and to sub-Saharan Africa is particularly concerning given the UK’s commitment to the region.
default  
defaultLooking just at bilateral flows, aid to Africa was frozen between 2011 and 2012, and aid to sub-Saharan Africa dropped by 2.9%. It therefore appears that the overall decline in aid to Africa and sub-Saharan Africa was affected by the overall drop in the UK’s multilateral contributions last year
default.  
defaultAlong with all EU countries, the UK promised that half of its ODA increases from 2005 would be allocated to Africa. 
defaultIn order to meet its target increases to Africa by 2015, the UK will need to increase ODA to the continent to £5.18 billion (£1.76 billion above 2012 levels). default13. 
defaultDFID should reverse the decline in its use of budget supportdefault. Budget support
default (general, sector, or a combination)
default is an effective financial instrument where governments have a 
defaultstrong commitment to fighting poverty and upholding human rights; reasonable financial systems to account for the use of resources; and mechanisms in place to ensure the availability of basic information to its citizens.
default 
default&#xa0;defaultD. Meeting the 0.7% target and implications for the futuredefault14. 
defaultWe welcome the UK’s leadership in delivering this long-standing commitment – a move that consolidates the UK’s position as a global leader in international development policy. Meeting all MDG targets, including the harder to reach people will be a challenge that will continue beyond 2015. 
defaultThe UK has the ability to meet the 0.7% target and must commit to providing at least 0.7% of GNI in aid as long as it is needed.default15. 
defaultIn 2013, the UK will become the first G8 country to meet the long-held UN target of spending 0.7% of GNI on ODA, and doing so 
defaulttwo years earlier than the timeline set out by EU countries in their 2005 commitment on aid spendingdefault.
default16. However, b
defaultecause of the upward revisions in GNI set out in government forecasts and because Chancellor Osborne insisted that “
defaultthe DfID budget will be adjusted to ensure we don’t spend more than 0.7 per cent”
default,
default defaultthere is a risk that the UK government will actually spend slightly less than 0.7% of GNI on ODA in 2013 as a result of its efforts to avoid any overspendingdefault.
default T
defaulthis could mean a big loss in cash for the world’s poorest. Even if 
defaultthe 
defaultUK
default’s
default total 
defaultaid budget
default in 2013 is just slightly below 0.7
default% of GNI
default, this could make a big difference
default in terms of aid volumes
default. For example, if UK aid 
defaultreaches only 0.695% of 
defaultGNI instead of 0.7% in 2013, the small 0.005% difference would actually mean almost £100 million
default less
default for development.
default So ensuring that the UK don’t spend less than 0.7% should
default be as
default important for the
default government as
default ensuring
default that
default the UK don’t spend mor
defaulte.
default17. A
defaults the UK Government did not act to enshrine the 0.7% ODA /GNI target in law,
default in the future
default it must ensure that it maintains this level of expenditure and does not slip back on its 
defaultpromise
default. As the UK economy starts to experience more consistent positive growth, 
defaultwe would expect to defaultsee the UKdefault’s aid spending increasing in line with GNI growth.default18. Given that around 80% of poor people live in MICs
default, it is crucial that donors continue to provide ODA to MICs to tackle poverty and inequality and reach the poorest people where their basic needs are unmet. 
defaultDFID should continue to give aid to MICs, whilst simultaneously working with national governments to tackle poverty and inequality.default Aid to MICs may differ from traditional aid and take the form of progressive tax reform or a focus on the extreme poor.  Specifically, the UK should:
default&#xa0;defaultE. DFID’s ability to spend the scale updefault19. 
defaultDFID has repeatedly provided assurances that it has plans and a sufficient pipeline to deliver and spend the 0.7% scale up efficiently and effectivelydefault.  
default20. We welcome these assurances but would welcome more regular, detailed and transparent information about changes in the UK’s ODA spending particularly around the budget and autumn statements being made available to the public.  
defaultSpecifically, DFID should make the updated information and data behind the annual statistics in development figures publically availabledefault.
default21. Additionally as mentioned above, DFID and the Treasury should make departmental allocations public and transparent at the time of the budget and autumn statements.  
default22. 
defaultDFID should continue to deliver value for money, making cost savings where possible whilst ensuring that development assistance reaches the poorest and excluded. DFID must ensure that it is delivering the right result
defaults
default; this is contingent on measuring the results that matter most to those living in poverty rather than following a donor-oriented approach. 
default23. 
defaultDFID must demonstrate progress in delivering on the aid effectiveness commitments made in Busan if the 2013-14 budget is to be spent effectivelydefault. In line with the Busan Partnership Agreement, DFID must adopt country ownership as a guiding principle by increasing on-budget-aid and using country systems as the default option. 
default24. 
defaultTo ensure that aid is effective and delivers impact it must be accompanied by local leadership. Donor-oriented accountability impedes domestic accountability mechanism, especially when aid is channeled outside the national budget. DFID must invest in strengthening domestic fiscal systems to increase tax collection and social spending as well as investing in transparency and participation to help citizens hold their governments to account, thereby improving the social contract between citizens and the state.
default&#xa0;defaultF. defaultDFID's ability to manage its bilateral spending through contractors, multilaterals and NGOsdefault25. 
defaultWe welcome DFID’s pioneering role in transparency and publication to IATI but as the UK scales up ODA, 
defaultDFID must remove the opacity around channelling development finance to private sector business through financial intermediariesdefault.
default26. A recent report
default by the Independent Commission for Aid Impact highlighted several areas of potential improvement in DFID’s relationship with private contractors including notably i
defaultmproving knowledge gathering and learning from contractors to improve and inform future projects. 
default27. DFID should also improve and increase its use of partner country-based contractors to improve local ownership of development programmes and projects as well as increasing capacity-building in partner countries.  
default&#xa0;defaultG. Whether DFID's current staffing levels are adequate, whether staff have the right skills and whether lengths of postings are appropriatedefault28. Staffing levels must continue to track increases in spending to ensure that DFID has the capacity and skills necessary to spend the UK’s ODA effectively and efficiently.
default29. In addition, given the continuing and increasing focus from the Secretary of State and DFID on the private sector, there are some potential concerns about whether DFID has the right mix of staff and the ability to develop the capacity of staff to combine development knowledge and ‘private sector thinking’.  In particular, NGOs have historically found that it is more effective to build the private sector-related capacity of development-skilled staff by emphasising business literacy and planning skills.
default&#xa0;defaultH. Whether restrictions on DFID's administrative expenditure are affecting the quality of DFID's work and value for moneydefault30. 
defaultDFID must be 
defaultadequately resourced to fund an inc
defaultreasing budget including sufficient administrative funding to ensure
default the quality of DFID’s 
defaultdelivery and the quality of UK
default a
defaultid.
default31.  A
defaultdministration levels 
defaultmust remain sufficient to 
defaultsupport transparency and accountability to all stakeholders. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Sumner, A (2012) Where will the world’s poor live? IDS In Focus Policy Briefing Issue 26
default 
defaultFor more information and analysis including more detailed recommendations please see the Bond report ‘Aid to middle income countries – what should be done?’, September 2013, available at 
defaulthttp://www.bond.org.uk/data/files/publications/Middle_Income_Countries_-_final_report.pdf
default The DAC does not provide multilateral imputations in its April preliminary release but publishes them the following December. Therefore, ONE uses a set methodology to estimate 2012 multilateral imputations for aid to Africa and Sub-Saharan Africa. ONE calculates this by applying the proportion that  multilateral agencies provided to Africa and sub-Saharan Africa in 2011 to what each DAC donor gave in global multilateral aid in 2012 (as reported in the preliminary April 2013 release). Details on ONE’s methodology for estimating imputed multilateral flows can be found in the methodology section (p.86) of the 2012 DATA Report: http://one.org.s3.amazonaws.com/pdfs/data_report_2012_en.pdf
default Based on the assumption that from 2013 the UK will meet its commitment to provide 0.7% of GNI in global ODA.
default HM Treasury, 20 March 2013
default,
default ‘2013 Budget Statement’. http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/budget2013_statement.htm
default Based on OBR’s March 2013 Economic and fiscal outlook. Although they haven’t been published, the government’s GNI projections for 2014 have been revised upward since then. This means that a 0.005% difference would actually mean even more money.
default DFID’s Use of Contractors to Deliver Aid Programmes, ICAI, May 2013, available at 
defaulthttp://icai.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/ICAI-REPORT-DFIDs-Use-of-Contractors-to-Deliver-Aid-Programmes.pdf
default.
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013
default