&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by The Wildlife Trusts
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultExecutive Summarydefault 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default1 defaultWhether the UK’s implementation of CAP might put English farmers at a competitive disadvantage to their regional and European counterpartsdefault.default&#xa0;
default1.1 
defaultA focus on short term competitive advantage
default/disadvantage
default 
defaultmasks the issu
defaulte
default of the long term
default health of the environment and the extent to which th
defaultis 
defaultdetermines the viability and
default future 
defaultof farming, and thus the incomes that farmers derive from 
defaultland management. 
defaultWe want to see the concept of environmental land management  ‘mainstreamed’, with
default defaultmanagement of the environment no longer culturally divided into activities described as ‘farming’ and those attributed to 'conservation’. 
defaultFor example, 
defaultwildflower grasslands perform 
defaultimportant functions 
defaultacross the agricultural landscape. The insects they sup
defaultport are crucial for the pollination of crops and this habitat provides food for all stages of their life cycle
default. 
default Invertebrates in wildflower grasslands play an important role in dung removal and soil creation. Wildflower meadows provide food and breeding 
defaultareas for predator species such as beetles, spiders and parasitic wasps, which carry out natural pest control of insects in arable crops. Grassland soils are a major carbon sink and many wildflower species sustainably fix atmospheric nitrogen. These grassl
defaultands perform all of those functions AND provide 
defaulthigh quality 
defaultfood which is produced with low inputs – an economic and environmental benefit. 
default&#xa0;
default1.2 
defaultThe 
defaultway in which CAP is implemen
defaultted must help farmers build ecological 
defaultresilience and restore the environmen
defaulttal performance of the land – ensuring that it continues to provide food
default, but also that it delivers 
defaultenvironmental public goods other than food. If farmers are adequately rewarded for the delivery 
defaultof environmental public goods 
defaultthen this should help 
defaultensure t
defaulthat 
defaultthey 
defaultare not placed at com
defaultpetitive 
defaultdisadvantage in the future.
default Indeed it will ensure that th
defaultose farmers who 
defaultcurrently 
defaultdo most to protect 
defaultenvironmental public goods 
defaultwill 
defaultnot be disadvantaged. A
default research project 
defaultthat 
defaultforms part of the UK National 
defaultEcosystem Assessment has concluded
default that spending CAP funds on improving access to attractive countryside, protecting wildlife and cutting greenhouse gases could produce annual benefits of over £18bn, for a loss of less than £0.5bn in UK agricultural produc
defaulttion.
default 
default&#xa0;
default1.3
default 
defaultAn approach that takes account of the full range of goods and services farmers can provide, 
defaultrequire
defaults
default 
defaulteffective
default 
defaultPillar I G
defaultreening measures 
defaultand a well funded Rural Development P
defaultro
defaultgramme that prioritises environmental land
default management schemes
default. 
default 
default&#xa0;
default1.4
default Embedding a value for 
defaultenvironmental 
defaultpublic goods
default defaultin farm management via greening measures linked to direct payments, provides a justification for public money to be given to farmers. It provides to society and businesses a clear message about the important role that farmers play in protecting and enhanci
defaultng the ecosystems that provide us with these goods and services.   
default&#xa0;
default1.5
default It is 
defaultalso 
defaultin the long term interest of the farming industry to have healthy soils, areas that support pollinating insects and predatory insects, and so on. The value of having nature
default side by side with farming are clear and in the longer term we believe can bring competitive advantage.  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1.6
default 
defaultWe recommend that Government
default:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1.7
default 
defaultWe believe that the public want healthy 
defaultfood that is good value for money, the production of which does not damage the natural environment
default.
default Against this background, 
defaultit is hard to argue against the value of 
defaultspending taxpayers
default’
default money on programmes w
defaulthose outcomes will benefit 
defaultnature
default, 
defaultthe long term 
defaultviability of farming
default, 
defaultEnglish farmers and the public
default. 
default&#xa0;
default1.8
default 
defaultNew Environmental Land Management Schemesdefault 
defaultAgri environment schemes 
defaultare a 
defaultkey mechanism for Government delivery of policy objectives
default. 
defaultThe added value that 
defaultthey can bring 
defaultfor society, the economy 
defaultand rural communities is under
default-
defaultappreciated. We refer the committee to a series of ‘Farming for A Living Landscape’ case studies which we have produced
default 
defaulthttp://www.wildlifetrusts.org/living-
defaultlandscape/farming
default. 
defaultT
defaulthese show how farmers’ entry into agri environment schemes, when supported by e
defaultffective advice, 
defaultcan bring wider benefits. 
defaultFor example, 
defaultAvon Wildlife Trust 
defaulth
defaultelp
defaults farmers 
defaultto get into Higher Level Ste
defaultwardship 
defaultschemes, enabling 
defaultthem to 
defaultm
defaultanage their fields with low inputs.  The lower input costs provide an economic benefit to the landowner as well as a positive benefit for ecosystem services. Combining gains for wildlife with potential commercial benefits for landowners is a high priority 
defaultfor this 
defaultproject
default. 
defaultMore generally, work undertaken by the Countryside and Community Research Institute (2010) has shown that 
defaultevery £1 of Environmental Stewardship money generates a total output in the local economy of £1.42.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1.
default9
default 
defaultAs mentioned above, 
defaultappropriate advice and facilitation (which can for example bring farmers together to develop collaborative agreements across wider areas) 
defaultis a key element in successful land management schemes. We welcome current discussions around the 
defaultmerits of a ‘facilit
defaultation fund’, 
defaultwhich would ensure that farmers would have access to appropriate advice and help
default,
default and that the opportunities for added value were fully realised. 
default&#xa0;
default1.1
default0
default The movement of 15% monies  from Pillar I to Pillar II can  ensure that maximum benefit is  derived from measures across the whole rural development programme
default. The
default strategic 
defaultand SMART 
defaultapplication  of 
defaultall 
defaultmeasures 
defaultwithin Pillar II when 
default 
defaulte
defaultmployed
default  according
defaultly (including NELMS)
default 
default can if 
default effected 
defaultproperly secure the progress of RDP in delivering its objectives for farm competition across the EU.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2. The defaultsteps the Government might take in implementing CAP to help tenant farmers in upland areas, and to take accdefaultount of issues pertaining to common land.default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2.1 
defaultF
defaultinancial support for 
defaulttenant farmers in upland areas should better reflect the scale of the ecosystem service benefits and the quality of the benefits upland farming can provide
default. The new CAP should be used to support farmers and tenant farmers who protect and enhance the value of upland catchments in 
defaultretaining and slowing down water flow to reduce flooding impacts, providing clean drinking water, storing and sequestering carbon a
defaultnd providing special habitats for declining species. 
default&#xa0;
default2.2 
defaultFarmers in these areas can derive bene
defaultfits from 
defaultrecrea
defaulttion and tourism or potentially cou
defaultl
defaultd be paid directly by businesses such as water companies. But there is currently not a clear model 
defaultor mecha
defaultnism 
defaultfor 
defaultthe 
defaultprovision of income to farmers for ecosystem services other than food
default, especially in the more marginal farming systems. We must therefore 
defaultlook to the direct payments system
default, including via the Greening payment,
default and 
defaultto the 
defaultNew Environmental Land
default Management Schemes 
defaultof Pillar II 
defaultto 
defaultprovide support 
defaultfor those marginal but environmentally valuable farms and farming systems –in upland areas and elsewhere. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3 The value of extensive grazing systems, where the level of grazing animals provides protecti
defaulton for important ecosystem services, but where income from livestock is relatively poor, must be r
defaultecognised, with support provided
default for these farmers to market and sell what are often high quality products. We think tha
defaultt much can be learnt f
defaultr
defaulto
defaultm 
defaultexisting 
defaultgoo
defaultd practice
default. 
defaultFor example 
defaultin Worcestershire
default, The Wildlife Trust has teamed up with Old Yarr Estates, promoting the sale of beef from cattle that have been grazing on the Trust’s nature reserves. 
defaulthttp://www.worcswildlifetrust.co.uk/wildlife-friendly-beef-boxes
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3. The defaultsteps Government needdefaultsdefault to take to ensure the reformed CAP will be less bureaucratic than its predecessor and what might prevent this ambition from being achieveddefault&#xa0;
default3.1 
defaultWhile it is recognised there are key principles such as simplicity of design and a desire not to ‘gold plate’
default 
defaultschemes, these should not constrain thinking on how to achieve potential gains.  Simple delivery should not mean partial delivery and effecti
defaultve environmental benefits need not amount to “gold 
defaultplating”.
default The
default key principle should be focused around SMART design identifying where and how a number effective environmental outcomes can be deli
defaultvered in combination with 
defaultagricultural outcomes.
default There should be no confusion between simplicity of design and ineffective delivery.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3.2 We believe that the importance of appropriate advice and facilitation is key to reducing time spent on paperwork and that a flexible and nuanced approach is needed t
defaulto both this and inspection regimes. The delivery of Greening through a 
defaultNational Certification Scheme (NCS) 
defaultwo
defaultuld certainly provide a clearer
default and more straightforward process, and a single but tiered Environmental Land Management Scheme should introduce som
defaulte further simplicity. 
default&#xa0;
default4. defaultHow the Government defaultmight defaultdefine the minimum activity required for qualdefaultification as an ‘active farmer’default&#xa0;
default4.1 
defaultAs mentioned above
default,
default low stocking densities are vital for maintaining and enhancing the health of many ecosystem services, 
defaultfor example grassland systems that can slow down or store water, such as the culm grasslands of Devon or the maintenance of upland or lowland heath vegetation. It is vital that the minimum activity required does not penalise those 
defaultlow intensity 
defaultmanagement 
defaultsystems and inadvertently lead to damage to habitats that are the source of farm incomes in themselves for example through tourism incomes.   
defaultThe level of minimum activity should
default th
defaulter
defaulte
defaultfore  be able to refl
defaultect the
default 
defaultfarming system that is 
defaultapp
defaultropriate 
default 
defaultto maintaining  such 
default habitats
default and other services provided by them
default. A
default ‘one size fits 
defaultall’ method
default of
default defining appropriate levels  of minimum activity 
defaultshould 
defaultthus be avoided
default. If implemented 
defaultproperly 
default‘minimum activity’ could 
default confer its own sense of value to 
defaultthose habitats, farming  systems and other services provided by such activity.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default5 How defaultGovernment defaultcan defaultensure that CAP delivers the best environmental benefits while supporting food productiondefault&#xa0;
default5.1 
defaultWe believe that 
defaultCAP payments 
defaultshould 
defaultaddress areas where there are 
defaultcurrently 
defaultmarket failures – specifically,
default provide farmers with payments for the ecosystem goods and services they provide to the public
default. 
defaultWe are very concerned that marginal farm systems that provide society with 
defaulthigh quality 
defaultp
defaultublic goods will remain on the verge of, or will be tipped into, bankruptcy, whilst 
defaultsome 
defaultfarming systems that continue to damage the natural environment will 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultbe rewarded with public money
default.   
default&#xa0;
default5.2 
defaultI
defaultt is essential that the public perceive the ou
defaulttcomes from the money they provide to farmers. 
defaultT
defaulthere must be a transparent way of the public seeing that the payments they make to farmers both via Pillar I and Pillar II deliver outcomes 
defaultin addition to food
default.  The 
default30% 
defaultGreening payment of approximately £495
default million per year to English farmers, must be made to work effectively to deliver perceptible environmental benefit. It should also be clear to the public that the bulk of the direct payment money (70%) should not be linked to damaging activities, with a r
defaultobustly enforced cross compliance system. 
default&#xa0;
default5.3 
defaultWe believe that the key ambitions for Greening should be to: 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe have set out our key tests for Greening as follows: default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default5.4 
defaultT
defaulthe movement of the maximum 15% of Pillar I monies into Pillar II to support Rural Development measures and the high prioritisation of 
defaultnew environme
defaultntal land management schemes are 
defaultessential to ensure that CAP delivers the best environmental benefits. 
defaultNew Land M
defaultanagement
default S
defaultchemes that foster collaborative workin
defaultg by farmers across landscapes 
defaultcould, with the right facilitation and advice, d
defaulteliver excellent environmental benefits 
defaulta
defaultnd lead to opportunities to 
defaultpromote produ
defaultcts derived from
default special local landscapes. A more transparen
defaultt and public face to CAP paymen
defaultts 
defaultwhich articulates how this public money helps to enhance local landscapes and pr
defaultoduction of quality local food which results in reduced transport costs, potentially reduced prices and reduced carbon emissions, would be helpful.
default&#xa0;default5.5
default defaultThe success or otherwise of implementation of this round of CAP reform for the environment will be dete
defaultrmined by the sum of 
defaultall
default of the parts: cross compliance, Pillar I greening, additional voluntary measures and Pillar II land management schemes. 
default&#xa0;default6. Tdefaulthe principal lessons the Government should learn from the implementation of the previous CAPdefault&#xa0;
defaultWe would 
defaulthighlight the following key lessons
default at this stage, but may wish to expand on this section in our oral evidence
default: 
default&#xa0;
default10 October 2013 
default6
default&#xa0;
default Bateman I. J. et al. (2013) ‘
defaultBringing Ecosystem Services into Economic Decision-Making: Land Use in the United Kingdom’
default, 
defaultScience
default , 5 July 2013: 
defaultVol. 341 
defaultno. 6141, 
defaultwww.sciencemag.org/content/341/6141/45
default.
default Countryside and Community Research Institute (2010) 
defaultEstimating the Incide
defaultntal Socio-economic Benefits of 
defaultEnvironmental Stewardship Schemes.
default