Written evidence submitted by the Prison Reform Trust (LAI 0082)default&#xa0;
defaultThe Prison Reform Trust is an independent UK charity working to create a just, humane and effective prison system. We do this by inquiring into the workings of the system;
default informing prisoners, staff and the wider public; and by influencing Parliament, government and officials towards reform. We welcome the opportunity to make a submission to the Committee.
default&#xa0;defaultThe right to a review for ‘whole life tariff’ (Vintner v UK)default&#xa0;defaultThe c
defaultourt found that the practice of detaining a prisoner without the possibility for review was incompatible with Article 3.  Prior to the Criminal Justice Act 2003, there was a legislative provision allowing for the review of whole-life tariff prisoners’ dete
defaultntion every 25 years. This was omitted from the new legislation. Re-establishing the principle of right to review helps to restore balance to a penal system distorted by the 2003 Criminal Justice Act. The purpose of sentencing is both punishment and rehabi
defaultlitation
default,
default 
defaultr
defaulteinstating the possibility of review, albeit with little prospect of release, puts a degree of hope into the lives of those very few people serving whole-life tariffs and affirms prison staff in their work to enable prisoners to progress even th
defaulte longest of sentences. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPreviously, the review process took place at the 25 year point. The difficulty with a review scheduled at the 25 year point is that this could result in a prisoner sentenced to a whole life term having their detention reviewed (an
defaultd therefore potentially being recommended for release) before life sentenced prisoners’ with prescribed tariff’s which exceed 25 years. This led to inconsistencies and we would therefore suggest that all long tariff prisoners be entitled to review at the 2
default5 year point.
default&#xa0;
defaultCurrent sentencing principles that include the starting point for a life sentence tariff of 30 years has skewed the system, increasing tariff length and creating inconsistencies in sentencing. The government needs to consider how it reviews 
defaultwhole life term prisoners’ in a way 
defaultthat
default differentiate
defaults
default from other life sentenced prisoners. The key is that a review takes place both initially, and then when appropriate, at subsequent intervals.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, rather than legislation setting mandatory mi
defaultnimum terms for life sentenced prisoners, judges should have discretion to set tariffs (alongside good sentencing guidelines). There has been an increase in mandatory and discret
defaultionary life sentences and an up-
defaultscaling in tariff lengths. Proportionality and
default consistency need to be reintroduced into the system. 
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe right of IPP prisoners to a speedy review of the lawfulness of their detention and to access rehabilitative courses (defaultBetteridgedefault v UK; James, Wells and Lee v UK)default&#xa0;defaultIn Jame
defaults, Wells and Lee the cou
defaultrt ruled
default that the rights of three prisoners 
defaultserving indeterminate sentence for pubic protection (IPPs) 
defaulthad been breached 
defaultas
default reasonable provision for their rehabilitation was not made. The lawfulness of indefinite detention based on a risk to the public has
default to be balanced against whether the risk is addressed in detention. The prison service has made efforts to address this situation but these have 
defaultnot gone far enough. The government should now re
defaultview all post tariff IPP cases (
defaultaround 3,500 people
default)
default and reassess risk, allocate additional offender management resources and prioritise courses and offending behaviour work. The Secretary of State should introduce new guidance and directions for the Parole Board to assess risk and for the release test, as 
defaultintroduced in the L
defaultegal 
defaultA
defaultid, 
defaultS
defaultentencing and 
defaultP
defaultunishment of 
defaultO
defaultffenders
default Act. A new release test should be introduced, that puts the obligation on the state to prove that someone is still a risk if the state is opposing release.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultN
defaultational 
defaultO
defaultffender 
defaultM
defaultanagemen
defaultt 
defaultS
defaultervice
default should extend the use of the open estate and use of release on temporary licence for IPP prisoners to maximise their chances of 
defaultpreparation for release.  The M
defaultinistry 
defaulto
defaultf 
defaultJ
defaultustice
default should issue new guidance s
defaulto that the policy of needing a Parole B
defaultoa
defaultrd decision to move IPP prisoners to open conditions is removed. This decision could be made by prison staff, as it is with de
defaultterminately sentenced prisoners
default.
default 
defaultThis is policy not law and could be changed without legislati
defaulton. This would also lessen the Parol
defaulte B
defaultoard’s c
defaultaseload and help to ensure the Parole B
defaultoard has the resources to regularly review IPP sentenced prisoners for release within a reasonable period of time in line with 
defaultBetteridge
default. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe state’s positive obligation to investigate allegations of sladefaultvery, servitude, forced or compulsory labour (defaultCN v UKdefault)default&#xa0;
defaultThe Committee is particularly concerned with 
defaultthe state’s positive obligation to investigate allegations of slavery, servitude, forced or compulsory labour
default, as highlighted by the case CN v UK.  This is
default directly relevant to the treatment of people in prison who have been coerced or trafficked into offending. We are concerned that that the government is in breach of its obligations under existing international law.
default&#xa0;
defaultMany people who have been coerced or tr
defaultafficked into criminal behaviour are in prison either on remand or serving 
defaulta sentence. 
defaultWe welcome the recent announcement by the Home Secretary Theresa May of the Government’s intention to introduce an anti-slavery law which would make the organisation of 
defaultslavery an aggravated criminal offence.
default Too often it is the victims of human trafficking instead of the perpetrators who end up being prosecuted and imprisoned for offences 
defaultcommitted under the threat of violence
default and
default intimidation. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTwo reports, one 
defaultpublished by the Prison Reform Trust and Hibiscus,
default and the other by the University of Cambridge, 
defaultsupported by the Economic and Social Research Council,
default have underlined the lack of support available to 
defaultforeign national women in custody in England and Wale
defaults who have been trafficked into offending. The latter by Professor Loraine 
defaultGelsthorpe
default and Dr Liz Hales examines the case management of migrant women in the criminal justice and immigration systems, including the identification of trafficked 
defaultwomen. It found
default violence, intimidation and rape were common experiences of the women, but evidence of their suffering was often overlooked and they did not receive the protection guaranteed to them as victims of human trafficking under international law. In only one of t
defaulthe 43 cases of human trafficking identified by the researchers did victim disclosures result in a full police investigation in relation to the actions of the perpetrators.
default&#xa0;
defaultProtection for victims of human trafficking from prosecution relating to offences c
defaultommitted as a result of their being trafficked is enshrined in international agreements and domestic case law. The EU Directive on Trafficking, now in force, specifies that “Victims of trafficking in human beings should, in accordance with the basic princi
defaultples of the legal systems of the relevant Member States, be protected from prosecution or punishment for criminal activities such as the use of false documents, or offences under legislation on prostitution or immigration, that they have been compelled to 
defaultcommit as a direct consequence of being subject to trafficking.”
default The UN Protocol to Prevent Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, requires governments to ensure that trafficked persons are not punished for any offences or activities relat
defaulted to their having been trafficked (e.g. prostitution, immigration violations).
default In
default addition, the UNOHCHR (2002) Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking: Guideline 2 Paragraph 5, states: “Ensuring that trafficked persons
default are not prosecuted for violations of immigration laws or for the activities they are involved in as a direct consequence of their situation as trafficked persons.”
default&#xa0;
defaultA recent Court of Appeal decision 
defaultoverturning the convictions of 
defaultthree children and one ad
defaultult woman accepted that that there is a heavy onus on police and prosecutors to thoroughly investigate trafficking allegations so that unnecessary prosecutions do not happen, and that courts should stay prosecutions where there is evidence that the
default defenda
defaultnt may have been trafficked.
default  We would like to see this decision reflected more clearly in guidance and training for police, prosecution authorities and courts. The Criminal Case Review Commission should be encouraged to review the convictions of vulnerab
defaultle women and children in custody who may have been trafficked into offending. We also note and support the recent calls for improved care and support of children and young people who have been trafficked into offending.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Prison Reform Trust and Hibisc
defaultus report 
defaultNo Way Out
default made a number of recommendations 
defaultthat
default 
defaultare of relevance:
default&#xa0;
defaultDeportation for foreign national prisoners and the right to family life (AA v UK) and lawful detention (defaultAbdidefault v UK)default&#xa0;
defaultC
defaulturrently deportation decisions are not based on real, 
defaultrelevant risk assessments that significantly take into account ind
defaultividual circumstances.  In AA v
default UK the 
defaultECtHR
default concluded that his risk of re-offending was low and “he had made commendable efforts to rehabilitate himself into society over a period of 7 years.”  There was also insufficient evidence to show that AA could reasonably be expected to engage 
defaultin further criminal activity, to make his deportation necessary “for the prevention of disorder or crime”
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultAll applications against deportation need to be considered on a case-by-case basis. The presumption that decisions taken within the Immigration Rule
defaults comply with Article 8 has led to a view that if proportionality has already been demonstrated at a general level, it need not be re-determined in every individual case. However, many people convicted of low-level offences are deported, breaching their ri
defaultghts to family and private life and causing immeasurable distress to themselves
default and their families.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs AA shows, individual assessment is necessary to ensure that the Government is complying with 
defaultArticle 
default8. Proportionality is not clearly defined and detai
defaultled guidance is needed. Under the new rules almost every foreign national prisoner is considered suitable for deportation regardless of the crime, risk of further offending, age at time of offence, time in the UK and family connections. Immigration service
default officers do not know how to assess risk of harm or whether deportation is in the public good.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn order for people to exercise their rights, legal aid for family rights cases need to be reinstated. Recent legal aid cuts severely limit access to justice fo
defaultr family law and 
defaultdeportation cases. This means that even people who have a strong case cannot access free legal advice to access their human rights. The Prison Reform Trust were recently contacted by a man in prison who explained that UKBA had told him his
default deportation complied with Article 8 because he was able to maintain contact with his baby in the UK through Skype
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultFollowing the decisions in 
defaultAbdi
default, the Secretary of State should issue new guidance to the immigration services relating to ongoing detention
default.  Firstly, people detained for immigration purposes should have a meaningful review monthly in accordance with the regulations. Currently, this is a perfunctory tick box exercise. Secondly, people who are detained pending deportation to countries that the
defaulty cannot be deported to should be immediately reviewed 
defaultfor assessment
default for bail or unconditional release. Thirdly, the practice of detention in prison for people post sentence should be stopped. Prison is not an appropriate environment for detainees.
default&#xa0;
defaultPrisodefaultner votingdefault (defaultHirstdefault vdefault UKdefault, defaultHirstdefault (No.2)default,default and Greens and M.Tdefault)default&#xa0;defaultFollowing the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in 
defaultHirst
default v
default UK
default 
defaultin 2005, it has been repeatedly highlighted that the automatic and indiscriminate ban on all convicted offenders, barring 
defaultthose on remand or in custody on default, does not comply with Article 3 Protocol 1 of the European Convention on Human Rights 1950. Despite that judgment, which called for the UK to amend its position according to the convention, successive governments ha
defaultve delayed taking action to implement reform
default, largely for political reasons. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHighlighting his concerns with the current situation, Dean 
defaultSpielmann
default, President of the European Court of Human Rights, said “I observe with the deepest dismay the lack of any si
defaultgnificant progress in executing this judgment.”
default&#xa0;
defaultSuccessive UK Governments have justified the ban on the grounds that it prevents crime and punishes offenders, whilst enhancing civic responsibility and respect 
defaultfor the law. However, the 
defaultECtHR
default:
default&#xa0;
defaultfound no 
defaultevidence to support the claim that disenfranchisement deterred crime and considered that the imposition of a punishment on all prisoners regardless of their crime or individual circumstances indicated no rational link between the punishment and the offende
defaultr.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn fact, the 
defaultECtHR
default continue
defaults, removal of the right to vote:
default&#xa0;
defaultruns counter to the rehabilitation of the offender as a law abiding member of the community and undermines the authority of the law as derived from a legislature which the community as a who
defaultle votes into power.
default&#xa0;defaultThe 
defaultcurrent 
defaultban 
defaultserves
default no purpose. It neither protects public safety, nor acts as an effective deterrent. It does not function as a means to correct the behaviour of offenders and does not assist in their rehabilitation. It is not ar
defaultticulated at the point of sentence and 
defaultbears no relation to the crime committed and so is an additional and arbitrary punishment. Following the principle of “just deserts”, to make the punishment fit the crime, it would be appropriate to strip offenders of
default their voting rights in cases of electoral fraud.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhilst
default the establishment of the 
defaultJoint Select Committee on the Draft Voting Eligibility (Prisoners) Bill
default marks a step forward
default, it is disappointing that the draft bill includes a proposal to retain the curre
defaultnt ban. The Committee of Ministers noted “
defaultthe third option [in the Bill] aimed at retaining the blanket restriction criticised by the European Court cannot be considered compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights”.
default 
defaultIt is 
defaultalso 
defaultregrettable that
default all three options retain an automatic ban on some sentenced prisoners, regardless of their particular offence.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe call for two further options to be considered:
default&#xa0;
defaultThis second option has been adopted in a number of Council of Europe countries, including France, Germany and Belgium and has been mooted by MPs and peers in parliamentary debat
defaultes. The UK has been given a sufficiently wide margin of appreciation for Parliament to decide on the best way to implement reform. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere would be few problems in extending the franchise to prisoners. The Electoral Commission already has mechanisms in pla
defaultce for remand prisoners to vote and identifies them as “hard to reach voters” with whom it is important to engage.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default 
defaultLeppard
default, D (2013) ‘May plans ant-slavery law to fight traffickers’, The Sunday Times, 25 August 2013
default Prison Reform Trust and Hibiscus (2012), No Way Out: A briefing paper on foreign national women in prison in England and Wales, London: Prison Reform Tr
defaultust. Available at 
defaulthttp://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/NoWayOut.pdf
default 
default 
defaultGelsthorpe
default, L. &amp; Hales, L. (2012) The Criminalisation of Migrant Women, Cambridge
default: University of Cambridge. Available at 
defaulthttp://www.crim.cam.ac.uk/people/academic_research/loraine_gelsthorpe/criminalreport29july12.pdf
default Dire
defaultctive 2011/36/EU Of The European Parliament And Of The Council of 5 April 2011 on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA, paragraph 14
default The Protocol to Prevent
default, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, Supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, United Nations, 2000
default 
defaultR v (1) L (2) HVN(3) THN(4) T-and-(1) The Children’s Commissioner for Eng
defaultland (2) Equality and Human Rights Commission (interveners) Criminal Court of Appeal 201201106B2, 2012004425C1, 201204763B3, 2012 04966B4
default The Observer, 8 September 2013, p23
default Prison Reform Trust and Hibiscus (2012) No Way Out, London: Prison Reform Trus
defaultt
default defaultSee House of Commons Library paper on UK’s responses to human trafficking 
defaultwww.parliament.uk/briefing-papers/sn04324.pdf
default&#x200e;
default 
defaulthttp://echr.coe.int/Documents/Speech_20130920_Spielmann_Gottingen_ENG.pdf
default 
defaultHirst
default v UK (No 1)
default Ibid.
default 
defaulthttps:
default//wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=2013315
default 
default