Written evidence submitted by tdefaulthe Churches Refugee Networkdefault (LAI 0084)defaultIntroduction:defaultThe requirement of a 1-year residence test will be contrdefaultary to the provisions in the European Equality Directives for the following groups of people, defaultand inevitably will defaultbring into sharper defaultpublic defaultcontrastdefault defaultthose areas of the defaultUKdefault Asylum and Immigration laws defaultwhich are defaultcurrently allowed to override most other ldefaultegisldefaultationdefault, and defaultwhich defaultoftendefault defaultclash with the Directives.default1)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultUndocumented citizens who have lived in defaultBritaindefault most of their livesdefault default(
defaultun- aware of the need to obtain British citizenship
default)
default2)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThose recently granted refugee status. (‘New Citizens’) default3)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe effectdefault on British partners of defaultnon-citizen defaultspouses/ partners and children default, especially those living abroad.default4)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAsylum seekers detained under DFT/Detained Fast Trackdefault5)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
default 
defaultThose who delayed seeking asylum, remaining ‘illegal’default for reasons of fear and ignorance.default default6)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe undocudefaultmented, defaultthe defaultStatelessdefault (de facto and de jure) default,  and the  ‘un-defaultremoveablesdefault’. default7)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultNdefaulton-citizen defaultvictims of domestic violence or abuse.default default8)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaulta) + b) Those who arrived with a valid visa to workdefault or studydefault, especially non-EEA, but found their work was abusive, their study not as agreed, or even non-existent. default9)default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
default Legal aid available to prisoners default10)default&#xa0; 
defaultLegal practitioners in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid for work done on defaultthe case if  the Court grantdefaultsdefault  Leave to Proceed default11)default&#xa0; 
defaultLegal aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success.defaultMost  of the circumstances detailed below apply especially to  those of non-white /non-British origin, with in 
defaultmany cases women being foremost amongst them. They are almost without exception relegated to the lowest socio-economic rungs, and the recipients of societal discrimination  in employment, accommodation and treatment by statutory authorities  tasked with pu
defaultblic order and border control. We fully  recognizing the need for  sensible border controls , serving our national interest of resource distribution and balanced economic development. Yet we find it extremely difficult to persuade ourselves that the measur
defaultes proposed do serve these common purposes rather than amount to a generalised discrimination amounting to xenophobia.
defaultWe will now comment specifically on each of the above groups listed: 
default1default.) Undocumented cdefaultitizens who have lived in defaultBritaindefault most of their ldefaultivesdefault but were not 
defaultmade 
defaultaware of the need to obtain British citizenship when their origins are from a Commonwealth country which gained independence after they left.
default Often they
default are
default not well educated and socially marginalised
default in fairly closed local communities
default. A
defaultfter years of 
default‘under the 
defaultstatutory 
defaultradar’ residence 
defaulttheir official presence in 
defaultBritain
default 
defaulthas
default suddenly registered. T
defaulthey are
default frequently
default shocked to be 
default‘
defaultdetected
default’, often having been un
defaulta
defaultware of their illegal status, 
default and help
defaultless to find a solution. 
defaultIf their ‘residence clock’ 
default(re)
defaultstarts at point of
default statutory
default detection they too wi
defaultll be excluded from Legal Aid, a
defaults will their children.
default 
defaultSeveral such cases  were found by us  in a number of primary schools in 
defaultSE London
default  by teachers 
defaultwith  whom we are in contact, and often they bring  them  to our attention because the
default stressful
default situation affects children’s behaviour and academic performance. 
defaultMany of these children have one British (possibly absent) parent  and one un-
defaultstatused
default 
default, often 
defaultsingle, 
defaultparent; many are entitled to obtain British citizenship both by UK parentage and by length of stay. Without obtaining 
defaultgood 
default legal advice
default,
default clarification 
defaultand – support 
defaultsuch an application will not be submitted and both child and un-
defaultstatused
default parent ar
defaulte at risk of detention and removal. 
defaultMostly such families are very poor, even destitute, and legal work could never be funded by them. 
default(The fee charged for a British passport is a first deterrent, at ?£750.-) We have helped to start a fund to collect such (
defaultexorbitant) fees, and referral to charitable legal assistance ‘on tap’ for such cases. 
defaultIf 
defaultparent and child(
defaultren
default) are not informed, and 
defaultthe authorities t
defaultake action to detain and remove, (often) long-standing 
defaultfamily life is destroyed and the children’s future
default and education disrupted. 
default&#xa0;
default2default.) Those recently granted refugee status.defaultBy the nature of our work, and that of our Committee members, we retain contact with many former asylum seekers who acquired a form of Leave to Remain, be it as  full refugees, or Discr
defaultetionary (Legacy
default) Leave. They may seek work and accommodation, but in the current climate this is incredibly hard. Many end up as home carers, cleaners  or security staff, employed on zero-hours contracts. We need not spell out the consequences of inadequa
defaultte and irregular income which engulfs them. Here is 
defaulta
default case study:
default&#xa0;
defaultFrancophone recently granted DLR under the Legacy backlog cases, works as an agency  home 
defaultcarer
default at £3.50/ hour 
defaultexcluding
default travel costs, achieving on average 16-20 hours per week, or £112-£120.-
defaultLived in a studio flat costing £900.-/ month, only part covered by Housing Benefit. She relies each month on church support for her food and utility bills. She has recently left the f
defaultlat and moved in with friends , hoping to save enough  to get her 16 year old daughter over here who is at risk of a premature Muslim marriage and female circumcision. 
defaultIt means she no longer meets HO rules for housing her child.
defaultAs this form of  Leave gran
defaultted does not permit Family Reunion as a refugee, she will need to earn £18.600+ to qualify for bringing her child to safety, which she will not achieve before the girl’s 18
defaultth
default birthday.....Paying to challenge the Family Rules  of July 2012, or her working c
defaultonditions,  is out of the question without Legal Aid.
default&#xa0;default3default.) The effect on spouses/ partners and childrendefault, especially those living abroad:default 
default1) 
default under the new Family Rules
default 09/07/2012
default 
default, and 2) under previous settlement grants 
defaultwhich declares them to be  NRPF
default 
default(No
default Recourse to Public Funds)
default until 2 years of settlement
default. 
defaultTo 
defaultpr
defaultevent the
defaultse groups 
default from access to Legal Aid would make an already highly ethnic/gender discriminatory situation even worse. 
default 1) 
defaultThose who entered into marriage/partnership whilst in the 
defaultUK
default under a current and valid visa are refused settlement rights, 
defaultand 
defaultwill not have legal help. Even if the partner is settled in 
defaultBritain
default, it is clear many will not have the resources to take private legal action
default, especially 
defaultfor those 
defaultwhere the British partne
defaultr is of 
defaultboth 
defaulta British ethnic minority background 
defaultand
default female, falling in the very lowest of median 
defaultUK
default annual incomes.
default (see 
defaultKofman
default and Wray, 
default and 
default)
default It also applies to those who 
defaultrecently entered under visas 
defaultobtained after an 
defaultArranged Marriage 
defaultand have not 
defaultyet reached the 2 years’ stay entitling them to settle in their own right.
default The JCHR will also be familiar with the current spate of legal actions against those affected by the Family Rules July 2012 receiving spousal
default/ close relative 
default visa refusals  affecti
defaultng even quite well off 
defaultand high status professionals who are  
defaultBritish citizens.....
default..
default 
default&#xa0;
default4default.) Adverse effect on asylum seekers detained under DFTdefault/Detained Fast Trackdefault 
default, that 
defaultpernicious
default, pseudo-
default legal procedure. During this form of detention 
default they are not deemed to have entered the 
defaultUK
default. 
default 
defaultThough there are legal aid contractors listed for these cases, the quality of such advice is variable from very good to appalling, depending on the luck of the dice
default via
default assignment by the Home Office in the 
defaultIRC
default.
default Such new arrivals 
defaultmay
default occasionally
default (though 
defaultthey 
defaultrarely
default are
default) be
default lifted out
default if their cases are recognised to be ‘too complex for quick resolution under DFT’
default(as the Guidelines say) 
default or if they are acknowledged to be sick, or victims of torture
default,
default thanks 
defaultnot to
default IRC medical centres but mostly 
defaultto independent NGO assessment by Medical Justice and a DFT  solicit
defaultor who will fight for them. Most
default however reach the end of their superficial and hasty procedure
default and failure
default, remain
defaulting 
default in detention to await removal...somet
defaultimes weeks and months (see recent migrant detention statistics) 
defaultThere are approximately 30.000 immigration detainees annually. Of these, 30% , or ?10.000 are held in Detained Fast Track.
default&#xa0;
default5.)defaultTdefaulthose who delayed seeking asylumdefault, remaining illegaldefault, 
defaulthaving 
defaultarrived irregularly/ unnoti
defaultced, including those trafficked and hence not ‘on the arrival  radar’ with
defaultin
default the immigration service.
default Often they avoid contact because their previous trauma causes them to  fear any  authorities.
default They struggle invisibly, with men
defaulttal health symptoms of PTSD, and at risk of exploitation and self harm.
default&#xa0;
defaultMost
defaultly such
default people, once detained, are immediately labelled ‘Detained Fast Track’ procedure cases
default; a p
defaultrocedure which, more than any other,  illustrates the 
default 
defaultdeeply ensconced 
defaultstatutory
default disbelief of anything a migrant 
defaultor asylum seeker 
defaultmay say. It
default means they 
defaultwill 
defaulthave an overhasty asylum procedure with
defaultin the IR
defaultC’s, with 
default 
defaultdesignated 
defaultspecialist
default contract 
default immigration detention lawyers, who have often no more than half an hour for interview a
defaultnd appeal preparation and who remain without
default any opportunity to gather quality
default evidence in support of the claim. 
defaultMost, 
defaulteg
default. 
default98-99% of such claims are refused. Thereafter many
default, especially those 
default 
defaultwho cannot be re
default-
defaultdocumented and/or removed, 
defaultremain in detention
default for prolonged periods during which they can sometimes access lawyers who will provide a Judicial Review
default if new evidence arrives 
defaultduring 
default the detention period.....
default. We 
defaultknow, as do many detention NGO’s and specialist lawyers, of 
default many such cases who eventual
defaultly succeed
defaulted
default and obtain
defaulted L
defaulteave to Remain. To close all access to 
defaultfurther 
defaultLegal Aid 
defaulteg
default. for Fresh Claims followed by Judicial Reviews, 
defaultfor such cases is 
defaultunjust.
default 
default6.) defaultThe undocumenteddefault, the Stateless, and the ‘default un-defaultremoveablesdefault’ default:defaultIf someone
default arrived without documents, or with false documents, 
defaultand are promptly or shortly afterwards detained, 
defaultthey may receive a criminal sentence, with further 
defaultdire 
defaultconsequences
default under these same proposals on 
defaulttheir eligibility for Legal Aid 
default-
defaultsee 
defaultbelow 
defaultunder 
default‘propo
defaultsed restriction on the scope of legal aid available to prisoners’.
default Whilst awaiting such procedures they will be in immigration detention and are legally deemed 
defaultnot
default to have entered the 
defaultUK
default.
defaultOthers 
defaultare or 
default 
defaulthave 
defaultbecome
default de facto Stateless, and
default the Home Office s
defaulthows no signs of 
defaultany 
defaultwillingness
default 
defaultto implement the new UNHCR Statelessness Guidelines
default unless coerced legally
default. 
defaultYou will be aware that
default a number of  countries 
defaultdon’t re-document their ex citizens: 
defaultamongst them 
defaultChina
default, 
defaultIndia
default, 
defaultBangladesh
default, 
defaultIran
default, 
defaultSomalia
default.
defaultEven if released on Temporary Admission or bail, such people will be unable to access a lawyer to present their statelessness- or ‘un-
defaultremoveable
default’ claim, and will live for prolonged periods  in 
defaulta 
defaultNASS Section 4 
default futureless and destitute 
defaultlimbo, depending on 
defaulthand-outs and compatriots......
default&#xa0;
default7.) default.) The effects on vdefaultictims of domestic violence or abusedefault who are in the 
defaultUK
default 
default less than a year and hav
defaulte not
default completed the 2 years residence test 
defaultwhich would allow
default them to 
defaulthave sought 
defaultsettlement in their own right.
default It appli
defaultes especially to those who arrive as spouses in arranged marriages, to those coming under Art.8 as refugee relatives, 
defaultto those who come to join as a 
defaultnewly wed
default or civil partner  to a British citizen , 
defaultand  also
default, especially, 
default to those recently arrived to joi
defaultn 
defaultin 
defaulta relation of informal cohabitation. During this time they are under conditions of ‘No Recourse to Public Funds’ and hence doubly ineligible for Legal Aid.
default Transfer into a strange country often brings out weaknesses in relationships, causing tensions 
defaultand breakdown. 
defaultAmongst NGO’s such as ours, it is well recognized that p
defaultartners
default/ family members
default of newly 
defaultstatused
default refugees
default, ‘New Citizens’,
default after a joyous reunion, soon 
defaultfind that the enforced separation of many years caused by the asylum procedure’s 
defaultnotorious
default  
defaultinefficiencies, may have 
defaultcaused estrangement, and often changed
default the power balance within a marriage.
default  U
defaultnder a 1 year residence 
defaultrequirement these vulnerable sp
defaultouses
default/ partners 
default would 
default have no legal remedy and their children may  be un
default(
defaultder
default)
default-protect
defaulted
default too
default.
default Under the EEA2006 Regulations
default on DV, this is even more so for
default thos
defaulte who cohabit informally; as yet they 
defaultcannot have Legal Aid for confronting a DV situation. 
defaultWhilst the 
defaultAIRE Centre
default has assisted to successfully win 2 such cases 
defaultat
default Tribunal level, t
defaulthis has not yet resulted in a change of regulation to protect informal co
default-
defaulthabituees
default who will be left
default without support
default. We
default currently 
default have one such a case, a visa-law abiding University  post Graduate 
defaultstudent
default. She was
default  finally released on bail after  5 month
defaults’
default immigration 
default detention
default.
default (Incidentally, her appeal will not be heard until Spring; due to Courts’ overload with unrepresented cases 
default,
default staffing
default-
default and interpreting
default problems
default.
default). Initially she was, regretfully, refused Legal Aid
default by her committed
default solicitor,
default (hi
defaultmself an ex immigr
defaultation detainee before becoming a solicitor
default) 
default until DV was documented and the AIRE precedent cases allowed a judge to grant Leave attracting  Legal Aid. Meanwhile, her church/ NGO support network in the NE had already given an undertaking 
defaultthey would carry the legal costs if no Legal Aid were to be obtained. It is but one of many examples of the voluntary sector being pres
defaultsed into substituting statutory funding 
defaultfor 
defaultmeritorious
default cases denied LA under the present rules
default.
default States’ explicit  obliga
defaulttions under international law  are being dishonoured by the new Legal Aid rules. 
defaultAt the current rate the ‘Big Society’ is shrinking to quite a small ‘Good Society’ as statutory resources are being 
defaultwithheld from more
default and more areas of migrant lives, whilst 
defaultobstructing their ability to contribute to our society
default economically and culturally
default. 
default&#xa0;
default8default.) defaulta)default+ b): a)default defaultThe effects on those who arrived with a valid visa to work and found their work was abusive, defaulttheir study defaultnot as agreed, or even non-existentdefault.
default E
defaultxamples 
defaultare those undocumented 
defaultmigrants, 
defaultso 
defaultoften youngsters,  who are arrested
default after being illegal trafficked, and then  kept locked up  in exploitative and illegal employment 
defaultmaintaining secret 
default‘
defaultmarijuana farms
default’ in unobtrusive private houses to pay off debts to 
defaultprotect their  far away families from criminality. And 
default the many women , from E.
default 
defaultEurope
default 
default, Africa, SE 
defaultAsia,who
default are 
defaultmisled and lied to, then 
defaulttrafficked hoping to ob
defaulttain  a promised ‘good job’ 
defaultend
defaulting
default up
default 
defaultraped, and 
defaultlocked 
default in
defaultto 
default sexual or  domestic exploitatio
defaultn
default with their passports confiscated and threatened with police- and immigration action
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default8.default) defaultb) defaultAdverse effects on foreign students, especially non-EEAdefault, 
defaulteg
default. in problems with the  grants- or college authorities. 
defaultStudents who applied in good faith to find their college was non-existent, or did not offer them the promised 
defaultgrants, or 
defaultthe pre-paid and promised 
defaultstudent 
defaultaccommodation. We had one such a case; fortunately we could
default at the time 
default 
defaultstill refer for 
default legal assis
defaulttance. That would no longer be available if a 1 year residence Legal Aid blocking rule is to
default be applied
default.
default&#xa0;
default9.) defaultThe proposed restriction on the scope of legal aid available to prisonersdefaultFor the government to rely entirely on the internal prison complaints sy
defaultstem to remedy regime deficiencies, injustices, failures to act on medical or disability issues is entirely unsatisfactory. 
defaultAmongst them:
default.) Prisoners with health – or disability problems of institutional  management within institutions.
default.) Prisoners requi
defaultring continuity of medication , 
defaulteg
default. 
defaultimmuno
default-suppressant- or psychogenic drugs.
default.) Foreign National Prisoners who were detained on arrival for an immigration documentary offense, and had no opportunity to consult a legal representative.
default.) Prisoners subjecte
defaultd to bullying by other prisoners or by staff.
default.) Prisoners unable to access education.
default 
defaultWe believe other orga
defaultni
defaultsations, with daily 
defaultexperience of the criminal prison system will respond better  on this  to the Commission; 
defaultW
defaulte do not have sufficient 
defaultin-depth 
defaultknowledge of prison practices to usefully assist the JHCR. 
defaultHowever, we refer the Commission 
defaultto an informed 
default analysis
default of the qualitative 
defaultissue
defaults in prison law (as well as alternative cost projections) 
defaultin a paper by 
defaultDr.N
default.
default 
defaultArmstrong of Matrix Chamber
defaults
default. 
default 
defaultWe no
defaultte however, that prisoners in the criminal law system usually have criminal, not immigration-  lawyers. Their expertise mostly does not cover immigration law and 
defaultit
default’
defaults
default attendant problems of health and trauma.  
defaultO
defaultur long standing experience of Immigration Re
defaultmov
defaultal Centre procedures shows us t
defaulthat 
default internal complaint procedures and remedies such as Independent Monitoring Boards, have had no 
defaultdiscernable
default effect on outcome for almost all most complaints except very minor ones.
defaultThe arguments below apply to Foreign N
defaultational Prisoners, be they in RDC’s or in prisons: 
default 
defaultT
defaulthe removal of Legal Aid for internal detention issues is
default therefore 
defaultlikely to be harmful
default, especially in connection with 
defaultserious 
defaultissues of medical/ mental health treatment, allegations of assault or sexua
defaultl abuse, and  racial , religious or gender discrimin
defaultatory language or behaviour; L
defaultike 
defaultother immigration detention NGO’s, 
defaultwe 
defaulthave 
defaultample
default distressing case anecdotes
default:
default 
defaultF
defaultailure to 
defaultacknowledge, or 
defaultoffer 
defaulttreatment to, 
defaultvictims of torture, as well as non-compliance 
defaultwith UN rules they should not be detained, is but one example.
default.....
default We have been involved in th
defaultis
default issue since 1998:
default It h
defaultas
default taken 
defaultdecades
default of insistence
default against 
defaultH
defaultome 
defaultO
defaultffice
default 
defaultstonewalling 
default by 
default specialist NGO 
defaultMedical 
defaultJustice
default, lawyers, visitors’ groups 
default and othe
defaultrs
default 
default to receive an undertaking from the Home Office such reports 
defaultwould
default be taken serious....
defaultusually only after a successful legal challenge.
default 
defaultFor 
defaultyears
default they were not
default; Lord 
defaultAvebury
default and colleagues have done PQ’s about Rule 35 from 2007 onwards
default,.....
default.  A
default  2012 i
defaultnspection report by ICI John Vine noted that torture victims
default, or vi
defaultctims of traffickin
defaultg were not adequately attended to 
default....
default    
defaultIt is only 
defaultvery 
defaultrecently
default, after  several more of their  PQ’s throughout 2013, 
defaultthat we have 
defaultfirst hand
default experience
default (in August 20
default13) 
defaulthow 
default for one of our 
default tortured 
defaultex detainees 
defaultthat undertaking 
defaultwas 
defaultfinally being honour
defaulted without having to resort to  judicial oversight 
defaultto grant release.
default 
defaultThe unreasonable 
defaulttime pressures on those solicitors 
defaultdoing contract detention work ensures that 
defaultunless specialist
default- and advocacy 
default NGO’s 
defaultcan 
defaultintervene , such claims
default will
default rarely reach the courts. If Legal Aid is no longer a
defaultvailable to those detained, 
default that option will be closed.
default 
defaultThat has grave
default real life 
default consequences: 
defaultW
defaultith 
default specialist therapeutic NGO’s
default we
default  remain aware of ex detainees where the consequences of neglecting PTSD in prison situations 
defaulth
defaulta
defaults 
defaultled
default 
default to 
defaultsevere 
defaultpsychotic breakdowns
default, in detention and upon release, 
defaultand  long term functional damage. 
defaultSuch a 
defaultcase history generalises undoubtedly to the gr
defaultowing number of  Foreign National Prisoners in our
default prison
default estate
default: Depriving them of Legal Aid  to address weaknesses of institutional management is a recipe for serious incidents both for 
defaultgood 
defaultinstitutional order and individual prisoner well being.
default 
default&#xa0;
default10) Pdefaultroviders of legal services in applications for judicial review against public bodies should only be paid for work done on the case if the Courtdefaultsdefault grantdefault Leave defaultto proceeddefault.defaultMuch of the preparatory work for a Judicial Review must be performed prior to lodging. 
defaultThis was a result of the reforms following the Carter Review. 
defaultThe advantage of this is less work/ cost post Leave to appeal, and better
default ongoing 
default 
defaultcommunication between counsels 
defaultand their instructing solicitors
default, 
default and the courts. 
defaultMany of the cases presented 
default, especially
default but not only, 
default in asylum/ immigration, are of the sort which have life changing consequences if 
default statutory decisions
default are not challenged
default.  
defaultIn addition a number of them are prepared
default specifically  to investigate
default significant issues of public inte
defaultrest which have previously been denied hearing, yet clearly need clarification or challenging as to their legality.
default 
defaultShould the preparatory work for such issues no longer be payable, then solicitors will no longer be able to instruct and pay counsels witho
defaultut putting their firm’
defaults economic survival at risk. It will increase the number of appeals against refusals of Leave to Proceed
default, another Court burden.
default 
defaultFurthermore, w
defaulte are  aware that many of the cases currently submitted for Leave to Proceed to Judicial Re
defaultview, will result in the respondent 
default‘
defaultgiving way
default’
default and  hence bringing the case to an acceptable outcome without incurring further public costs. The level of such pre-hearing agreements is , we are told and have experienced, very high; ( around 50%, see also
default Armstrong, footnote 8) since lawyers would not usually pursue a matter if they were not already convinced of 
defaultit
default’
defaults
default merit, both in legal terms and in Legal Aid criteria parlance Such cases are de facto ‘successful’ from the point of view of the appellant. However his/her legal team 
defaultwould not be paid
default for that good outcome.  
defaultWe are aware that the intentions of the 
defaultrece
defaultnt 
defaultlegislation 
defaulton the legal profession’s reform, 
defaultare to 
defaultsignificantly 
defaultshrink the number of 
default public law practitioners
default through
default removing 
default their ability to 
defaultdraw
default upon Legal Aid
default. B
defaultut to do so by denying the less affluent, less articulate  members of those in the
default UK  
defaulta
default legal remedy is unjust
default and 
defaultdiscriminatory, 
defaultcontraven
defaulting both the Equality Directive on equal access to goods and services and 
default Art.6 of the ECHR
default on the right to fair trial. It will short
default 
defaultcircuit and thus  
default 
defaultdeeply 
defaultdamage the quality of legal debate i
defaultn our 
defaultcountry
default and eventually our legal profession, and it
default’
defaults
default 
defaultdeservedly 
defaulteminent
default global reputation. Both will irreparably damage  the common good.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default11)default 
defaultLdefaultegal aid should be removed for all cases assessed as having “borderline” prospects of success.defaultThis section does not differentiate between ‘borderline’ and ‘vexatious’ cases: Legal Aid removal for cases clearly falling into the latter category is of course justifiable....if ‘vexatious ‘ is what they are........However, ‘borderline’, as used here,  i
defaults a concept which is seriously deficient in practical application: 
defaultThe LAA Legal Aid awarding authority already implements a self administered assessment by the solicitor, the ‘merits test’. Many solicitors practice it in a very cautious manner
default to avoid lo
defaultsing income
default, sometimes resulting in deserving cases not being heard for lack of Legal Aid (so-called ‘cherry picking’)
default.
default 
defaultOther practitioners, committed to their client
default’s predicament
default, will take more risk in assigning ‘merit’ and 
defaultpersist in 
defaultapply
defaulting
default for Lega
defaultl Aid. But there is an issue he
defaultre of potential damage to 
defaultdevelopment
default of the law
default:  ‘Borderline’ cases are often those where existing case law or expert evidence is not conclusive or  situation
defaults
default in the ‘real world’
default  have
default changed such as to require judicial r
defaulte-examination.
default 
defaultOn such occasions a ‘borderline’ case will serve the public interest of developing a new judicial consensus to address the
defaultse
default changed circumstances. 
defaultWithin the immigration- and asylum  field that continues to happen on a regular basis: the 
defaultresolution of issues around female gender, definitions of persecution, of internal relocation, of freedom to practice  or openly hold religious or political views have all been the subject of such ‘borderline’ cases and resolved in a manner which changes c
defaultase law judicial consensus. 
default 
defaultWe do not therefore approve of this proposal to tighten exclusion for cases whose assessment of merit are not immediately clear cut.
defaultSeptember 2013
default 
defaultCouncil Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000 implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin
default&#xa0;
default: also called the "Race Directive" (
defaultDirective 2000/43/EC on Anti-discrimination
default) 
default
default 
default 
defaultDirective 2006/54/EC
default of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation
default 
default
default  Council 
defaultDirective 2004/113/EC
default of 13 December 2004 implementing the principle of equal treatment between men and women in the access to and supply of goods and
default services
default 
defaulthttp://sprc.info/news/family-migration-rules-could-cost-uk-850-million-in-a-decade-say-middlesex-academics/
default 
defaultMiddlesex 
defaultUni.Dept.Law
default/Dept. Sociology: 
defaultDr.H.Wray
default/
defaultProf.Elinor
default 
defaultKofman
default: 
defaultEconomic evidence
default  used 
default in  J
defaultudicial 
defaultR
defaulteview of
default ‘JAVED’ AIT 
defaultB’ham
default, and also 
default presented at APPG-
defaultMig.
defaultenquiry
default into Family Migration,  of 
default04thMarch 2013
default 
defaultsee footnote 4) 
default 
default;
defaultEcon.analysis
default of govt.
default’s
default bia
defaultsed econ
defaultomic 
defaultassumptions.
default 
defaultFor full ethnic median income table,
default see:
default 
defaulthttp://www.ctbi.org.uk/pdf_view.php?id=862
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultwww.
defaultappgmigrationdefault.org.uk/.../
defaultAPPGdefault_
defaultfamilydefault_
defaultmigrationdefault_inquiry_
defaultreportdefault 10/06/2013
default&#xa0;
defaultwww.equalrightstrust.org/ertdocumentbank/
defaultguidelinesdefault%20complete.pdf
default&#x200e;
default&#xa0;
defaultwww.
defaultunhcrdefault.org.uk/.../
defaultUNHCRdefault-
defaultStatelessnessdefault_in_UK-
defaultENG-screen.pdf
default&#x200e;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.airecentre.org/resources.php/21/residence-rights-of-durable-partners-in-domestic-violence-cases
default 
default (
defaultAIRE=
defaultAdvice on Individual Rights in 
defaultEurope
default)
default 
default‘Costing the ‘Transforming Legal Aid’ proposals
default, Dr Nick Armstrong, Matrix 
defaultChambers
default.See
default appendix
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultThe UK Border Agency’s response to the Independent Chief Inspector and HMIP’s joint report on the effectiveness and impact of immigration detention casework
default  12/12/2012
default 
defaultwww.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-22574757
default&#x200e;
default : 
default17 May 2013 - 
defaultThe
default ruling paves the way for immigration detainees who have had a 
defaultRule 35 report
default ignored in the past to seek to be released
default 
defaultThe High Court said the Home Office had failed to follow its own policy on releasing detainees who could show they wer
defaulte victims of torture. In a test case, five detainees successfully argued that officials had ignored medical evidence. 
default&#xa0;
default