&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1. Do you think that the EU should be providing funding to Member States to tackle youth unemployment? Does EU action respect Member States’ powers in the area of social and employment affairs? 
defaultYes.
defaultYes.
default2. How do you think that the EU can best ‘add value’ to Member States’ efforts to tackle unemployment? 
defaultIt is our view that policy making in this area should be founded on good research evidence.  For example, the recent OECD report “Skilled for Life? Survey of adult skills” identifies priority areas for a range of countries to address in relation to developing and using skills. Whilst not exclusively concerned with EU member states, the report provides clear evidence based on robust research.  Where the EU can add value, is to support member states to make good use of robust research evidence to help identify local priorities.  The EU can also take steps to ensure that comparative research evidence is not used simply to create ‘league tables’ but instead to enable member states to understand mechanisms within their own economic and skills infrastructures that appear to lead to high levels of youth unemployment. For example, to identify whether unemployment is the result of structural or cyclical change; the result of under-investment in basic education, career information and guidance or work-related skills development; or associated with particular combinations of indigenous or migrant communities, industrial sectors, or social contracts.
default3. 
defaultIs there sufficient disaggregation in EU measures to tackle youth unemployment between, for example, support for young people classified as being not in education, employment or training (‘NEETs’), support for newly qualified graduates looking for work, and general career guidance? 
defaultThere does need to be disaggregation in EU measures given that whilst youth unemployment is a general issue, it is particularly acute in some countries – it is important to tease out why youth unemployment is so starkly differentiated by country.  A key feature of turbulent economic conditions is that career opportunities for young people are likely to be subject to rapid change – the ‘labour market’ is a dynamic notion.  For example, it is difficult to predict change and historical data is sometimes an unreliable guide to future employment opportunities.  There is a need across the EU for effective careers education and guidance for all and particularly for those most vulnerable in the labour market (inexperienced school or university graduates and those without qualifications).   
defaultThere is in the UK an inadequacy of general career guidance.  Recent changes in the provision of career guidance to young people have effectively removed responsibility for provision of careers education and guidance to schools with insufficient safeguards to ensure 
defaultquality provision.  The first Ofsted inspection of careers information and guidance found many schools struggling to meet their obligations. A recent report by the National Careers Council in the UK calls upon closer working relationships with employers to support schools in their new responsibilities.  There is concern that the involvement of schools and employers in the provision of careers education and guidance is, whilst necessary,  not sufficient, and that young people need access to impartial, advice from qualified career guidance practitioners, working to national professional standards.  Emphasis should be placed upon career learning, as a process of assimilating information about work, self and opportunities, rather than rational models of decision-making.  Up-to-date theorising on the way in which the transition from education to employment and employment to employment is undertaken should be used to inform policy-making.  For example, ideas about career trajectories being ‘constructed’ in response to personal and local economic drivers, are gaining ground over former theories of careers as developmental, linear progression.  
default4
default. Are the EU’s accounting, monitoring and evaluation procedures sufficient to be able to determine whether EU funded projects to tackle youth unemployment have been successful or not? Are there ways in which they could be improved? 
defaultLeft blank.
default5. 
defaultHow do you think the funds allocated through the Youth Employment Initiative (YEI) and the European Social Fund (ESF) could best be spent? 
defaultAs might be expected, we would support more research but also using existing research evidence more constructively to target interventions that have impact.  For example, we have a good deal of researched evidence that suggests graduates’ transition into the labour market is enhanced by periods of work experience but we  know less about the range of pedagogies that facilitates real learning from workplace learning.  Thus, it is suggested that research should focus not only on whether (a particular intervention) appears to work but also why it does.  This is likely to involve researchers, policy-makers, employers and educational practitioners working more effectively together.
default 6. 
defaultDo you feel that young people (aged 15-24), youth groups and their representatives are involved and consulted to a satisfactory degree in the decisions being made around EU funding for youth unemployment projects, and how they are administered? 
defaultProbably not but it is difficult to provide the appropriate environment for this to take place.  Working with representative groups such as the National Union of Students has enormous value.
default7
default. Should the EU and Member States take into account the positive and negative socio-economic impacts of youth migration due to unemployment when designing measures to tackle youth unemployment? How might any negative consequences be mitigated? 
defaultYes.
defaultIt appears that over the last 3-4 decades, there have been a number of initiatives aimed at reducing youth unemployment.  One of the characteristics of these has been that they have all been short term – putting in place mechanisms that provide long-term structured support have rarely been explored but perhaps should be now.    Another feature of previous initiatives has been to place emphasis on the deficiencies of individuals experiencing unemployment – the expression NEETs is a prime example – and there appears to be far less emphasis placed on the cumulative impact of conditions that are outside the individual’s control (such as lack of mobility, paucity of job opportunities, funding structures that disincentivise further education and training) or mechanisms to help young people to manage/adapt to change. 
default8
default. How can the EU and Member States embrace new technologies and new methods of working to combat youth unemployment? 
defaultSocial media provides a valuable channel to create a different message – rather than young people (particularly NEETs) being regarded as inadequate, inexperienced or victims of the economy – young people could be promoted positively as a resource of ideas, innovation, energy etc.  Changing the paradigm could lift confidence of not only young people but also employers and other organisations.  There is risk that some young people may be abandoned rather than celebrated.  The EU could lead new thinking about how we conceptualise young people and their economic activities.
default&#xa0;
default10 October 2013 
default&#xa0;
default