&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from the defaultCivil Aviation Authority (WRT 026)default1.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe CAA is the UK’s specialist aviation regulator. It exists to protect consumers and the public.
default1.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultOur activities include: making sure 
defaultthat the aviation industry meets the highest technical and operational safety standards; protecting consumers’ rights; enhancing competition; preventing holidaymakers from being stranded abroad or losing money because of tour operator insolvency; planning 
defaultand regulating all UK airspace; regulating airports, air traffic services and airlines; and providing impartial advice on aviation policy.
default1.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIn the submission below, the CAA 
defaultprovides its observations on how the aviation sector has responded to the challenge 
defaultof improving its resilience to severe winter weather conditions and, when disruption does occur, how effective it is in looking after passengers. 
default1.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAlthough the focus of much of 
defaultthis submission is 
defaulton resilience and passenger welfare, the CAA’s primary focus
default during any major disruption to aviation is on public safety. Although coping with the severe winter weather conditions that the UK has experienced over the last few years has proved challenging
default for the aviation industry
default, at no time during any of the resul
defaultting disruption was the CAA concerned that 
defaultaviation 
defaultsafety was being compromised.
default&#xa0;
default2.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultDecember 2010 was the coldest month in the UK since records began
default,
default according to the Met Office
default,
default with heavy snowfall during late November and December causing significant disruption to air transport. At Heathrow, this disruption was felt particularly heavily between 18 and 22 December, when heavy snow caused extensive disruption for several days, wit
defaulth significant disruption also occurring at a number of other UK airports.   
default2.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultFollowing this,
default a
default number of separate but linked 
defaultworkstreams
default 
defaultcommenced
default to consider how the aviation sector 
defaultcould improve its response to the threat of disruption, including that po
defaultsed by severe winter weathe
defaultr
default.
default2.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAt the systemic level there
default was 
defaultwork from the Government’s South East Airports
default Task Force (SEAT), where the CAA 
defaultled 
defaulta 
defaultsub-group examining how to improve delay and resilience 
defaultperformance, including how best to manage capacity r
defaulteduction in 
defaultsevere winter weather 
defaultconditions and 
defaultto 
defaultensure an efficient and timely return to full service. 
defaultA number of 
defaultindividual airports 
defaultalso took forward their own work on improving 
defaulttheir 
defaultresilience 
defaultto severe weather conditions 
default– most notably 
defaultDavid 
defaultBegg
default’s
default Heathrow Winter Resilience Inquiry, on which the CAA 
defaultsat 
defaultas an independent observer.
default Similarly, many airlines reviewed
default their own policies, procedures
default and practices for communicating passengers
default during disruption and for looking after them in the event th
defaultat they become stranded.
default2.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe CAA also
default undertook 
defaultits own work to consider the passenger experience during disruption, examining what worked well for passengers as well as what failed to meet their needs
default, with the aim of feeding 
defaultintelligence into the work 
defaultbe
defaulting taken forward by the industry. The CAA’s work concluded in summer 2011. In its final report
default, the CAA identified three areas where
default performance should be improved
default:
default2.5.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWorking 
defaulttogether 
defaultwith the Airport Operators Association (AOA) and the British Air Transport Association (BATA), 
defaultthe CAA has ensured that the findings of its investigation have been embedded into the ongoing work o
defaultf airports and airlines to reduce the number of passengers affected by major disruption, and then to improve the care given to those passengers that remain
default 
defaultstranded at
default the airport
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultSince winter 2010/2011, signific
defaultant improvements have been made to how the aviation sector responds to major disruption.
default Below, the CAA has highlighted a number of these key improvements.
default3.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe CAA is continuing to work
default with the aviation industry, both in the UK and internationally,
default to ensure that it can maximise its contribution to improving winter resilience
default for the benefit of passengers
default. 
default3.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe CAA is currently undertaking a number of seminars for airlines and 
defaultgroundhandlers
default at Heathrow airport to ensure that the airport community, in particular non-EU airlines
default, who may not be as used to complying with the reg
defaultulations as EU ones
default, understands its legal obligations to passengers during periods of disruption. 
default3.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultTo ensure that if severe 
defaultdisuprtion
default does occur we have an accurate picture of compliance with the regulations across the country, t
defaulthe CAA is also expanding 
defaultits capability to observe disruption events first-hand so that it can cover a number of regional airports as well as airports around London. In addition, the CAA is currently engaging with the travel agent community to ensure that passengers that book via 
defaulta travel agent or other intermediary can be notified by the airline in the event of flight disruption. 
default3.5.
default&#xa0; 
defaultOn the subject of passenger rights, the CAA and members of the BATA airlines group have developed a short, easy to understand leaflet on passenger right
defaults which this group of airlines have agreed to distribute to passengers in the event of flight cancellations or long delays. This is important to ensure that passengers are aware of what the airlines should be doing for them, and alongside our oversight wil
defaultl help to ensure that airlines comply with their obligations at all times.
default&#xa0;
default4.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAlthough the weather experienced
default during 
defaultwinter 2010/2011 was unusually severe, the last two winters have also been challenging.
default The fact that, despite
default these challenging conditions, we did not see a repeat of the major disruption in winter 2010/2011, 
defaulthighlights the benefits 
defaultof the improvements that have been made, in particular by 
defaultairports to improve their resilience to severe winter weather. 
defaultA
defaultirlines ha
defaultve played their part also, in particular through improving how they communicate with passengers when flights are cancelled or delayed, and also through improving the capability and flexibility for passengers to rebook 
defaultonline 
defaultwhen disruption does occur.
default4.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThi
defaults is not to say, of course, that there is no further room for improvement. Despite the significant improvement in resilience achieved by Heathrow airport since winter 2010/2011, 
defaultthe last two winters have seen significant disruption to British Airways
default’
default oper
defaultations at the airport, in particular at Terminal 5. 
defaultThe sheer scale, intensity, and complexity of British 
defaultAirways’ operation at the airport 
defaultmeans
default that it faces a number of unique challenges. 
defaultThese challenges are likely to be similar for any operator who ha
defaults a large proportion of operations at an airport, particularly if capacity is constrained, either at peaks or as with Heathrow generally.
default4.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWe believe that to 
defaultensure airlines who face these circumstances are prepared for them
default, there are series of steps that 
defaultcan be taken to ensure passengers are supported during disruption no matter how challenging the circumstances
default. These include, 
defaultensuring their systems for proactively contacting passengers about flight disruption are robust and they have correct contact details for their passengers; being 
defaultready
default 
defaultto deal effectively with 
defaultlarge and growing numbers of 
defaultpassengers when disruption occurs 
default(for instance avoiding long queues for all passengers by breaking them into groups based on their flight’s status and ease of rebooking); making sure their all their staff have the same 
defaultinformation to handle customer queries,
default and 
defaultthat
default information is up-to-
defaultdate.
default 
default4.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIn addition, 
defaultin circumstances where airlines have a large fleet operating from a single airport, there are also particular operational challenges, for instance in terms of de-icing, 
defaultwhich they need to ensure they are ready for during future severe w
defaulteather events.
default4.5.
default&#xa0; 
defaultTo ensure that they are prepared for future events, and that disruption to passengers is minimised, th
defaulte CAA continues to work closely with 
defaultUK and foreign airlines to 
defaultensure they are addressing these issues
default. 
default&#xa0;
default5.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe Civil Aviation Act 2012 allows much more flexible regulation as rules will be set within a licence that can be amended (subject to due process). On 3 October 2013 the CAA published our final proposals for regulation at Heathrow and Gatwick if we make a
default final decision in January that these airports have substantial market power that requires regulation. 
default5.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultConsistent with better regulation principles, we have not sought to regulate for all eventualities but pick only key priorities for inclusion in the fir
defaultst licences granted to the airports. 
default5.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultBecause we understand how important service quality during disruption is to passengers, one of the first licence conditions will strengthen each airport’s approach to operational resilience. The rules will ensure that 
defaultthe airport has robust plans to deal with disruption, and an effective approach to collaboration; and will ensure full communication with affected passengers.
default 
default5.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWe are in the process of consulting on our Final Proposals for 
defaultregulation for the period after A
defaultpril 2014. 
defaultThese licence conditions are part of that consultation. 
defaultThe licences would come into force on 1 April 2014 so will not have an effect this winter, but plans and processes should be in place by October 2014
default to ensure that by winter 2014 regulated
default airports have a licence-condition obliging them
default to
default strengthen their readiness for disruption
default for the first time
default.
default5.5.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThis condition would mean that if the airports failed to have adequate provisions in place 
defaultto deal with 
defaultdisruption 
defaultto their operations or had 
defaultnot followed their plans
default, and the CAA judged that more could have been done 
defaultby the airport 
defaultto protect passengers from the impact, they could be subject to fines, 
defaultpotentially up to 10% of 
defaultthe airport
default’
defaults
default turnover.
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.metoffice.gov.uk/news/releases/archive/2011/cold-dec
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.caa.co.uk/docs/5/CAA%20review%20of%20snow%20disruption%20-%20Final%20Report%20-%20WEB%20VERSION%20_2_.pdf
default 
default