&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Energy Networks Association (HOT59)default&#xa0;
defaultEnergy Networks Association (ENA) welcomes the opportunity to provide written evidence to the Energy and Climate Change Committee’s Inquiry on Heat.  
defaultENA is the voice of the networks representing the ‘wires and pipes’ transmission and distribution network 
defaultoperators for gas and electricity in the UK and Ireland. 
default&#xa0;
defaultENA’s role is to represent the interests of our members at home and in Europe. Through our work we aim to deliver the most supportive environment for investment and development of the energy networ
defaultks of the future.  ENA's overriding goals are to promote the UK and Ireland energy networks and enable our networks to be the safest, most reliable, most efficient and sustainable in the world.
default&#xa0;
defaultENA is in a unique position to address the needs for a balanc
defaulted solution as it represents both electricity and gas network operators.  Through our various work streams our members are considering the different scenarios needed to meet the 2020 and 2050 targets, and how the electricity and gas networks could be trans
defaultformed as a result.  For examples ENA coordinates the sharing of learning from the Low Carbon Network Fund projects for our members that are addressing the challenge of an all electric future.  At the same time our Gas Futures Group are undertaking a study
default to look at the future of domestic heating.
default&#xa0;
defaultMost recently, ENA has commissioned Delta-ee to carry out a study to look at 2050 Pathways for Domestic Heat.  This study, which was published in October 2012, demonstrates that by 
defaultkeeping a variety of options o
defaultpen to decarbonise heat gives lower risks, and potentially a lower cost path that pursuing a narrower end point. 
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIs the government taking the right approach to reduce heat energy demand?default&#xa0;
defaultENA and its members believe that while the Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) has made significant progress in its approach to reducing heat demand, with the introduction of the Green Deal, the roll out of smart meters and the Energy Companies 
defaultObligation, there is far more that can be achieved in this sector. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn 2012 the ENA Gas Futures Group commissioned Delta-ee to analyse the UK’s housing stock in a detailed way looking at how the various heating technologies currently available could be ef
defaultfectively deployed.  It remains the most comprehensive domestic heat study ever undertaken, and built on the Redpoint work ENA published in 2010.  In this study, it is assumed that there is a 21% reduction in thermal demand through the measures mentioned a
defaultbove. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIf the UK is to meet its carbon targets, reduction of this level are essential and ENA members believe that energy efficiency measures should be the immediate focus for DECC, as it is the single biggest and most cost efficient change that can reduc
defaulte heat demand and therefore carbon.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Green Deal and ECO are the two policies going forward focused on the uptake of insulation measures.  However, it is unlikely that these will deliver the required uptake without being supported by a robust framewor
defaultk of policies, including policies such as Building Regulations. The introduction of smart meters presents an opportunity for customers to engage with their energy usage and therefore better manage their heating systems.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWhat progress is the government defaultmaking on reducing the demand for heat?default&#xa0;
defaultENA members believe that DECC has laid the foundations for the required heat demand reduction with the Green Deal and ECO. However, consumer engagement is only likely to improve where there is a robust framework for
default these policies, and that the consumers are informed to such a level that they are able to see benefits, in opting for such measures through incentives and regulation.
default&#xa0;defaultBiomass is deemed a key fuel for heat production from both the cost and GHG perspectivedefaults.default&#xa0;default What should be done to ensure methods of calculating biomass GHG balance represent an accurate picture?default&#xa0;
defaultAs highlighted in the Delta-ee study, biomass pellet boilers are a mature technology, although product and supply chains in the UK are only just em
defaulterging. However, strong growth in this sector could lead to cost reductions for this technology.  The most significant challenge for future biomass uptake remains customer perceptions, as currently biomass performs poorly in consumer research.  Any future 
defaultuptake will also be highly dependent on the security of fuel supply due to competition for resources with transport and larger generation and the development of a UK supply chain. 
default&#xa0;
defaultENA members recommend that DECC continues to engage with the key stakehold
defaulters in this area to ensure that the methods used for calculation of the biomass/GHG balance are developed in accordance to set standards.
defaultThere are sustainability guidelines for biomass, do these go far enough?default&#xa0;
defaultENA members support the existing 
defaultsustainability guidelines for biomass and believe that these should be regularly reviewed to ensure they remain appropriate as this market develops.
default&#xa0;defaultWhat will the local environmental impact (for example air pollution) be from the use heat generation in urdefaultban areas, for example CHP units?default&#xa0;
defaultWhen CHP units are powered by biomass, these units produce more particulate emissions than gas fired CHP. There is also a potential issue with the required vehicle movements in urban locations and the associated pollution
default. 
default&#xa0;defaultWhat are the relative merits of using gas to directly provide space heating compared to centralised electricity production plus domestic heat pumps?default&#xa0;
defaultThe ENA/Delta-ee study looked at the merits of a balanced approach towards low carbon heating. It 
defaultexamined three basic scenarios for the future of heating in the UK:
default&#xa0;defaultCustomer Choicedefault – which 
defaultallows customers to choose, based on upfront cost, running cost and fit with the housing stock: 
defaultCarbon reduction targets for the residential sector will not be met
default by a combination of reducing thermal demand and allowing customers to chose their heating appliance (without government intervention). Even when strong progress is made on low carbon heating appliance cost and performance, and with 75 TWh of biomethane, c
defaultarbon reductions (2040-50 compared to 2010-20) of 46% are achieved. Gas boilers continue to be used in 19 million homes, based on their low capital and running costs, and excellent fit with UK homes. 
default&#xa0;defaultElectrification and Heat Networksdefault – which 
defaultassumes 
defaultvirt
defaultually all homes use either electric heating 
default(heat pumps &amp; direct electric) 
defaultor heat networks, fed-by zero carbon heat
default. There is no role for gas. This predicts 96% reduction in carbon emissions (from 2010-20 levels). 
default&#xa0;defaultBalanced Transitiondefault - 
defaulthas an approximat
defaultely even split across three heating types: 
default(1) heat networks 
default(dense urban areas &amp; new build), 
default(2) low carbon gas appliances 
default(suburbia), 
default(3) electric heating 
default(some suburbia, rural and new build). This includes 75TWh of biomethane and a 90% reduction in carb
defaulton emissions 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Report makes clear that the Balanced Transition scenario can be achieved with less government intervention (and at less cost to the customer) than Electrification &amp; Heat Networks (E&amp;HN), while achieving 90% carbon reduction from today to
default 2050:
default&#xa0;
defaultHigh efficiency gas appliances
default (including hybrid gas boiler using air source heat pumps),
default have lower running costs (and in some cases upfront costs) for certain parts of the housing stock 
defaultthan electric alternatives and are easier to retrofit into e
defaultxisting homes with gas boilers.
default&#xa0;
defaultA greater mix of technologies has a lower impact on the energy system
default. The addition of hybrid heat pumps and gas appliances to the mix reduces additional peak electricity generation demand by 50% lower than E&amp;HN, and distri
defaultct heat is focused on higher density housing.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe benefits of a Balanced Transition approach are that it achieves a 90% carbon reduction from today to 2050 and it:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDECC has recently indicated its interest in hydrogen and ENA’s members are eager to explore these issues further. Members have submitted bids into the Network Innovation Competition process involving the developm
defaultent of hydrogen projects and also the gasification of waste. Both these potential technologies will, if commercially viable, contribute to decarbonising heat in the UK while continuing to make use of the existing gas distribution system.
default&#xa0;defaultWhy is community defaultheating/CHP not more common in the UK?default&#xa0;
defaultDistrict heating is a mature and widespread concept in several EU markets, but there is minimal UK penetration.  Whilst there has been development in district heat in the UK since 1950 (with the majority being develo
defaultped in the 1960’s) still only 1-2% of UK heat demand is met by the technology.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis is largely due to the discovery of North Sea gas and subsequent investment in gas networks which makes gas available as a fuel to c. 80% of all households in the UK
default&#xa0;
defaultWith 
defaultregard to the physical fit of district heating in UK homes, there is technically no restriction on the housing type; however the ease of fitting a heat interface unit (HIU) inside the house to the heat “main” can be challenging in retrofit.
default&#xa0;
defaultEconomically, 
defaultdistrict heating is highly sensitive to discount rates and the relevant amortisation period, and currently the costs in the UK are much higher than continental Europe.  However there is a potential for UK costs to fall if there were to be large growth in d
defaultistrict heating.
default&#xa0;
defaultConsumer perception of district heating is limited due to a lack of understanding or awareness of this technology. Therefore there is no strong consumer opinion on the pros/cons of domestic heating as a low carbon technology.  Due to the 
defaultcurrent lack of regulation in this sector there are possible concerns over consumers being “tied in” to long-term contracts and a perceived “loss” of freedom of choice for their heating.  Using district heating requires the minimal change in consumer behav
defaultiour, as the interface and controls function like a boiler and connect to an existing system. Indeed there is evidence of high customer satisfaction once connected.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is important to note that district heating is only low carbon when the fuel used to gen
defaulterate the heat is also low carbon.
default&#xa0;defaultWhat are the lock-in, costs and GHG savings from the promotion of different forms of domestic heating solution?default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultThe table below details the upfront costs, annual running cost and CO2 savings versus a condensing gas 
defaultboiler. This information is taken from the ENA/Delta-ee report, and is based on a pre-war, semi-detached property on the gas grid. .
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultUpfront Costs 
defaultAnnual Running Costs 
defaultAnnual CO2 Emissions (kg)
defaultAnnual CO2 Emissions savings vs. condensing boiler (kg)
defaultCondensing Gas boiler
default£2,640
default£1089
default3921
default&#xa0;
defaultGas Heat Pump 
default£13,000
default£771
default2563
default1358
defaultAir Source Heat Pump 
default£8,500
default£1,310
default3223
default698
defaultGround Source Heat Pump
default£16,384
default£1,178
default2,877
default1044
defaultBiomass
default£11,000
default£1,226
default814
default3107
default&#xa0;
defaultThe ENA/Delta-ee report methodology developed a residential heat model that combines the following in order to assess the 
defaultoptimal appliance technology pathways, by property type, based on known/emerging heating technology, required to meet carbon and renew
defaultable targets, highlighting the impact on consumers (cost to change and behavioural) and the potential load changes on the gas and electricity distribution networks out to 2050
default&#xa0;defaultThe report contains:default&#xa0;defaultA housing stock modeldefault dividing the UK housing stock into 
default35 segments according to fuel availability and use, age, and building type. For each segment the thermal demand and how this changes decade by decade to 2050 is defined. 
default&#xa0;defaultA technology performance modeldefault: which forecasts future cost and performance– coverin
defaultg: gas boiler; gas heat pump; low electrical efficiency micro-CHP; high electrical efficiency micro-CHP; gas boiler + solar thermal; air source heat pump; ground source heat pump; hybrid gas boiler + air source heat pump; biomass boiler; district heating; 
defaultdirect electric (storage) heating. 
default&#xa0;defaultA customer choice modeldefault that incorporates the physical fit of different technologies with different parts of the housing stock; customer uptake based on payback and upfront cost; and customer attitudes to different technologies. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis in turn led to the development of three 
defaultbasic scenarios: Customer Choice; Electrification and Heat Networks; and Balanced Transition.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe table below shows the comparability of various heating technologies from the Delta-ee report.  Further information and more detailed analysis can be found i
defaultn the full report, 
defaulthere
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultShould the government take any further any specific actions in relation to cooling?default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultNo Comment 
default&#xa0;defaultWhy does defaultthe RHI not seem to promote heat pumps successfully?default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultENA members believe that the RHI should be promoting Heat Pumps and is actively lobbying for this via the Smart Grids - Work Stream 6 forum, consultation responses and discussions with DECC.  We are al
defaultso working with the industry to ensure that the connection of heat pumps should be carried out via the Mircogeneration Certification Scheme (MCS) accreditation scheme. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDECC has indicated its’ plan to incorporate the MCS accreditation scheme and ENA proce
defaultsses into RHI. This would mean that any Category A &amp; B heat pump would receive the RHI. Any Category C heat pump would not receive the RHI, and the customer would have to pay for any subsequent reinforcement.
default&#xa0;
default It is believed that the above process was to b
defaulte applied via the Electricity RIIO Period from 2015.
default&#xa0;defaultHow successful will the RHI be when rolled out to households?default&#xa0;
defaultENA members believe strongly that in order for the Domestic RHI to be successful, any renewable heating installation must be run in 
defaultaccordance with the MCS accreditation scheme.
default&#xa0;defaultThermal storage is a potential useful method of balancing electricity/energy demand both diurnally and annually.default&#xa0;default What is government policy doing to promote thermal storage, and should it do more/different?default&#xa0;
defaultThe key issues are that that electricity is currently not easily or economically storable, although there is significant research and development into this area.  Also thermal storage is not the only solution to energy storage.  Gas can currently provide b
defaultoth diurnal and seasonal energy storage.  Gas also provides a pivotal role in providing peak heat.  Hydrogen produced by electrolysis of water using surplus wind generation provides a storage option or way of greening gas supply chain if it is injected int
defaulto the gas network.
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default