&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWritten defaultedefaultvidence defaultfrom defaultSebastian Payne, University of Kentdefault (PCD 02)default&#xa0;
default1.
defaultAfter ten years of widespread discussion on the reform of war powers, several select committee inquiries, a Government consultation and White Paper in 2007-2008, and the present Foreign Secretary’s commitment to enshrine in law the duty to consult Parliament, progress towards that reform appears to have stalled.
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultThe House of Lords Constitution Committee
default,
default having produced an outstanding in depth report in 
defaultJuly 2006 proposing regulating the war powers by way of a detailed convention, now opposes ‘formalisation’. The Brown 
defaultadministration produced
default a detailed resolution 
defaultbut failed to implement it
default. William Hague’s commitment to enshrine in law Parliament’s role has come to nothing presumably due to the opposition or indifference of his cabinet colleagues. 
default&#xa0;
default3. The
default Constitution Committee’s recent 
defaultreport
default 
defaultConstitutional arrangements for the use of armed force
default 
default(July
default 2013)
default states
default that, “Neither primary legislation nor a resolution should be introduced as a means of formalising the role of Parliament in approving deployment decisions” (paragraph 61). The Committee goes on to say, “It seems that much of the impetus for formalising Parliament’s role is to make a political statement about where decisions should be taken, rather than to correct deficiencies i
defaultn the legal or military process.
default” (paragraph 63). They conclude that the existing convention
default is the best solution.
default&#xa0;
default4. 
defaultThe Constitution Committee was persuaded by its witnesses that the nature of modern warfare had fundamentally changed and that had created a scenario inimical to detailed regulation. T
defaulthe Committee also assumed
default that there exists a convention of sufficient clarity to satisfy the conditions of a modern democracy and to enable the House 
defaultof Commons
default “to exercise political control over, and confer legitimacy upon, 
defaultsuch (
defaultdeployment
default) decisions
default” (paragraph 64).
default&#xa0;
default5. 
defaultI disagree with both the underlying premises and the conclusions
default of the recent Const
defaultit
defaultution Committee report
default. Changes to modern warfare make it more necessary not less that Parliament’s role should be clear. The ability to kill people in new ways or destroy enemy infrastructure by use of cyber warfare does not negate the fundamental constitutional question of the legitimacy of deployment decisions. 
defaultMission
default creep has always existed 
defaultas have civil wars with broader geo-political consequences. 
defaultI do not believe that there exists a convention of sufficient detail. Indeed, the complexity of modern warfare must have increased the uncertainty of whatever germ of a convention that does exist.
default&#xa0;
default6. 
defaultMy preferred solution would be a detailed resolution regulating Parliament’s ‘role and responsibility’. This needs to be underpinned by a Standing Order of the House. My understanding is that a resolution is technically not binding on the Government therefore a Standing Order would help embed the
default 
defaultobligations. 
defaultA good starting point for the detailed resolution
default is the one proposed by the Government of the day
default in the 
defaultGovernance of 
defaultBritain
default 
defaultWhite Paper. The resolution was not perfect. It gave 
defaultvery 
defaultwide discretion to the Prime Minister
default as to when to consult P
defaultarliament and there were exclusions relating 
defaultto Special Forces,
default emergencies
default and security related factors
default. Clearly a Prime Minister will need discretio
defaultnary powers so
default the exact wording of a re
defaultsolution is a matter for further discussion
default. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default7. 
defaultSome, perhaps all, members of the Political and Constitutional Reform Committee favour statutory regulation of the war powers. The attractions are clear, namely, that the government of the day would be affixed with an absolute 
defaultset of 
defaultlegal obligation enforceable as a last resort in the courts. My reservation with regard to this is the question of dragging the courts in to this field. It should be possible to draft an Act in a way that grants legal immunity to individual soldiers even if the deployment order turned out to be legally invalid. What I think is unavoidable is that courts would be obliged to consider the lawfulness of deployment 
defaultdecisions where a claim is made
default for an injunction or 
defaulta 
defaultdeclaration. Given that the judiciary face persistent, and in my view ill informed attacks from some politicians and newspapers, with regard to applying the Human Rights Act, it would merely add to the rhetoric that the judiciary are usurping their role. If it were necessary for the judiciary to exercise such a supervisory role, then of course, such disobliging rhetoric about the judiciary could and should be ignored. In my view, the appropriate institutional parties, at least for the time being, are Parliament and the Executive.
default 
defaultWere there to be a written constitution in the future different considerations would apply
default to the role of the courts
default.
default&#xa0;
default11 October 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default