Eurofound
default submission of written evidence to the House of Lords, fo
defaultllowing the call of  
default9 Sept
default.
default 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (Eurofound) is a tripartite European Union Agency, whose role is to provide knowledge in the area of social and work-related policies. Eurofound was established in 1975 by Council Regulation (EEC) No. 1365/75, to contribute to the planning and design of better living and working conditions in Europe.
default&#xa0;
default-------------
defaultWhile several matters are addressed, this written evidence replies in particular to:defaultQuestion 1: default‘
defaultDo you think that the EU should be providing funding to Member States to tackle youth unemployment? Does EU action respect Member States’ powers in the area of social and employment affairs?’
defaultQuestion 2: default‘How do you think that the EU can best ‘add value’ to Member States’ efforts to tackle unemployment?’
defaultQuestion 3: default‘Is there sufficient disaggregation in EU measures to tackle youth unemployment between, for example, support for young people classified as being not in education, employment or training (‘NEETs’), support for newly qualified graduates looking for work, and general career guidance?’
default-------------defaultYoung people have been hit very hard by the economic crisis.  According to Eurostat
default, the youth unemployment rate in the EU28 was 24.1% in September 2013. The rate is higher than 30% in six countries including Greece and Spain, which report levels close to 60% of their economically active young population.
defaultThe highest youth unemployment rates on record have been reported by 19 Member States during the current economic crisis. Among them in seven countries this highest level  on record was recorded in 2013: Italy, Spain, Greece, France, Slovenia, Cyprus and even Luxembourg, where youth unemployment was practically unheard of before the crisis. 
defaultThe youth unemployment rate in the UK was 21.3% in May 2013. This is -0.8% lower than the historically highest level of 22.1% recorded in September 2011, but still 7.7% higher than the level recorded in May 2008, the pre-crisis scenario. 
defaultIn Europe in 2012, 14.6 million young people aged 30 and below were not in employment, education or training (NEETs). Eurofound estimates that the cost in financial terms of 14 
defaultmillion NEETs to European economies was £129 billion in 2011.
default This amount increased to £136 billion in 2012. In the UK, NEETs were recorded to have cost the economy an estimated £18.3 billion in 2011 and £18.7 billion in 2012.
defaultEuropean societies’ failure to reintegrate these  young people into the labour market represents an enormous loss of talent now and into the future. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFostered by increasingly high youth unemployment rates and the economic and social consequences associated with youth unemployment and being NEET, there is a renewed sense of urgency to develop and implement policies to bring young people (back) into employment, education or training across Europe. 
defaultThe policies implemented by Member States to ensure greater participation of young people in education and employment involve a wide range of different initiatives. These policies often intervene at different points along a process that can be described as a ‘pathway to employment’, which involves young people’s transition from formal education into the labour market.
defaultFigure default1default: Pathway to employment (defaultSourcedefault: Eurofound 2012).default&#xa0;
defaultFor many young people this pathway from education to employment is not a straightforward one and those who are currently NEETs have diverged from it somewhere along the way. Policies tackling the NEETs problem are therefore either preventative interventions that keep young people from leaving this pathway or tackle the issue of 
defaultbringing young people ‘back on track’ in order to re-join the pathway, develop their skills and participate actively in society. 
defaultAs is illustrated in Figure 1, some youth employment policies seek to intervene in the early stages of the pathway with the goal of tackling the risk factors linked to potential disengagement from education and training as young people with no or low-level qualifications have a higher chance of experiencing unemployment than their skilled peers. Other policies intervene at later employment-related stages of the young person’s pathway to employment. 
defaultMore specifically, these policies can be grouped into five broad categories, which may partially overlap. Measures to prevent early school leaving recognise that there are ‘supports’ that can be provided within the school environment, at home or through holistic means that can improve students’ chances of staying in education or training. Measures to reintegrate early school leavers seek to provide timely support for those who have just decided to drop out by encouraging and enabling them to continue their studies or to find other, more suitable training alternatives. School-to-work transition policies intervene at a slightly later stage of the pathway as their primary goal is to ease young people’s transition ‘from learning to earning’ and thereby ensure that public investment in education and training is maximised. Finally, measures to foster employability and measures to remove practical and logistical barriers to employment are policy interventions that intervene closer to the labour market entry point, with the former seeking to address gaps in transversal and/or job-specific skills and competences (as well as other labour market abilities and aptitudes) and the latter aiming to address specific barriers faced by young people from vulnerable backgrounds in particular.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe responsibility for policies in employment, social affairs and inclusion is shared between the EU and its Member States. This is regulated by the treaties establishing the European Union which define the role of the EU in the field of employment. This role is limited and restricted to coordinating and monitoring national policies jointly with suggesting and promoting the use of best practices in areas like employment, poverty and social exclusion. This is complemented in particular case by the provision of additional funding  for the implementation of some initiatives and projects related to employment. 
defaultTaking this framework into account, and with the aim of having an immediate impact on youth unemployment, in 2013 the European Commission promoted a number of practical measures and initiatives acknowledging the heterogeneity of youth. The most recent of these was the Youth Employment Package published in December 2012 and the proposal in March 2013 for a €6 billion funding package for the Youth Employment Initiative.  Against this background, a newly published communication
default highlights steps to be taken without delay to get young people back into work, education or training:  
defaultThe heterogeneity of the youth population and its different needs are specifically addressed by the proposal on the Youth Guarantee. 
defaultAs part of the Youth Employment Package presented in December 2012, the Commission called on Member States to implement a Youth Guarantee in order to ensure that all young Europeans receive a good quality offer of employment, continued education, an apprenticeship or a traineeship within four months of leaving school or becoming unemployed. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe concept of a youth guarantee
default is not new and acknowledges the heterogeneity found among young people. In order to reintegrate this group into the labour market, the different subgroups, ranging from early school leavers to newly qualified graduates, need a tailored intervention suited to their characteristics and specific needs. 
defaultAs pioneers in the activation approach to labour market policies, the Nordic countries have attempted to implement youth guarantee schemes for many years. In 1984, Sweden introduced the first genuine youth guarantee, followed by Norway in 1993 and Denmark and Finland in 1996.  As some difficulties were encountered in the implementation of these schemes and in maintaining them through the recession of the early 1990s, these measures have been periodically revised during the last decade. A new job guarantee scheme for young people was introduced in Sweden in 2007 while the current Finnish youth guarantee scheme was introduced in 2005 and revised in 2010 and 2013.
defaultThe Finnish youth guarantee is based on a two-step approach. Firstly, a jobseeker registered with the public employment service (PES) receives a tailored service where a needs assessment is carried out and a personal development plan is devised. Secondly, there is the guarantee: the intervention judged likely to be most effective for the jobseeker on the basis of their development plan. This can be an offer of a job, a place in education, an apprenticeship, or a traineeship for those who haven’t been able to find one.
defaultFigure default2default: The two-step approach of the Finnish Youth Guarantee (defaultSourcedefault: Eurofound 2012default)default&#xa0;
defaultIn 2010, the intervention was successfully delivered to more than 80% of the programme’s participants. All young people aged 24 or below and all newly qualified graduates aged 29 or below are eligible to apply to the newly reformed Finnish youth guarantee.
defaultThe main strengths of this youth guarantee are that it:  
default&#xa0;
defaultDiscussion about a European youth guarantee started in 2005 when the European Council agreed that every young unemployed person should be offered a new start within six months of unemployment. In 2008, the Council reduced the time period to ‘no more than four months’ for young people leaving school. The implementation of a youth guarantee has, however, been very limited despite several calls for its promotion from the European Council, the European Parliament, the European Commission and the European Youth Forum. 
defaultIn order to help and support young people to enter the labour market, and following the European Commission’s youth unemployment proposal of 5 December 2012, the Council of the European Union issued a recommendation on establishing the Youth Guarantee on 22 April 2013.
default The priority is now to implement the Youth Guarantee, which will require sustained national-level investment.  The recommendation of 22 April develops six axes for the implementation of the Youth Guarantee at the national level (Figure 3): building up partnership-based approaches; early intervention and activation; supportive measures enabling labour market integration; use of EU funds; assessment and continuous improvement of the scheme; and its swift implementation. As such, they address the heterogeneity of the different subgroups of young people by considering their different needs, aiming in particular to prevent early school leaving, as well as enhancing employability overall, including for third-level graduates.
defaultFigure default3default: Eurofound graphical elaboration of 6 axes for the implementation of youth guarantee as in the Council recommendation (2013)default&#xa0;
defaultIn order to monitor and support Member States in their implementation of the Youth Guarantee, the European Commission has called on the Council to adopt the proposed Country Specific Recommendations on the Youth Guarantee and on Member States to quickly implement these recommendations. 
defaultMoreover, the European Commission will provide practical support to Member States in the implementation of the Youth Guarantee and will organise mutual learning events where good practices and experiences can be exchanged. Member States with regions experiencing youth unemployment rates above 25% are also invited to submit a Youth Guarantee implementation plan by Autumn 2013. These plans should set out how the Youth Guarantee will be implemented at national level, the role of public authorities, funding, evaluation system and timetable. Other Member States are encouraged to submit similar plans by spring 2014.
default&#xa0;
defaultTogether with the Council Recommendation, general literature identifies the following key factors and lessons learnt in the Nordic models that ensure the effectiveness and successes of youth guarantee schemes.
default 
defaultTailored support:default Young people, as new entrants into the labour market, are different from other workers and the PES should provide personalised and tailored services for them. 
defaultPartnerships:default Successfully delivering youth guarantees requires the mobilisation of numerous actors (such as the PES and youth organisations) and resources towards a common goal.
defaultEngaging with social partners:default The involvement of social partners is key for understanding and developing the skills needed in the labour market. 
defaultReaching young people:default Developing channels of communication, especially with those who drop out of school, is essential to being able to offer them employment services and guarantee.
defaultActing quickly:default Timely support and intervention is necessary to avoid disengagement setting in. 
defaultA flexible and wide range of policies:default The ability to adapt to individuals’ economic situation and to handle the diversity among young people is important.
defaultYouth organisations: defaultThe involvement of youth organisations and their representatives in drafting initiatives is important. In particular, youth work is of particular relevance in order to engage the most ‘hard to reach’ groups of young people. 
defaultMonitoring the implementation of the scheme:default It is essential to develop a set of indicators in order to formally evaluate the implementation of the Youth Guarantee. This will allow governments to intervene and to fix possible problems with the newly established framework. 
defaultIt is important, however, to remember that while its effectiveness is well recognised, a youth guarantee is not a universal remedy and that its effectiveness depends strongly on the factors above.  
defaultIt is also necessary to highlight the following points.
defaultYouth guarantees alone do not remove structural problems in labour market access for young people, this is of particular importance for those countries with structural problems of labour market access for youth.  The success of a youth guarantee is highly dependent on other public policies in place such as the availability of educational places, apprenticeships, internships and so on. Those countries with more structural problems in terms of labour market access for young people need to imagine the Youth Guarantee as a set of different initiatives that acknowledge the diversity among young people and that intervene at the different stages of their pathway to employment.
defaultIt is also important to understand that the Youth Guarantee is more than a simple initiative and much more than a guarantee. The Youth Guarantee has to be considered in many Member States as a new, innovative way of thinking and designing policy for young people where intervention is conducted with the jobseeker on the basis of the results of a personalised development plan.  The Youth Guarantee is a concept for better coordinated policies for young a person that involves: 
defaultThe tailored approach of the PES and the personalised development plan for registered young people in the first part of the scheme will ensure the right intervention for each jobseeker and will maximise the effectiveness of the Youth Guarantee. 
defaultA successful personal development plan and youth guarantee requires a well-developed and capable public or private employment service and a reorganisation of responsibilities for training, education and youth policies following improved partnership and coordination among labour market players and institutions. The International Labour Organization (ILO) has estimated that the implementation of a Eurozone-wide Youth Guarantee
default will cost €21 billion, and Eurofound is to publish a new estimate in 2014. In any case, those countries with a high rate of youth unemployment and a poorly developed employment service will have to face particularly high costs in order to implement the Youth Guarantee. These countries will need to adopt a gradual approach while considering an overall reform of the labour market for young people as well as reforms to the current infrastructure of their employment services. Great efforts will have to be made to achieve this considering when the substantial budget constraints these countries may have to face. 
defaultIn this regard, the role of the EU is fundamental in monitoring the effective implementation of the Youth Guarantee, in supporting Member States with funding wherever possible, in ensuring that the budget for this reform is invested wisely, and in promoting coordinated action and stimulating mutual exchange of good practices among Member States to tackle and redress the youth unemployment crisis. 
default14 October 2013
default7
default&#xa0;
default Eurostat – European Union Labour Force survey estimation as at September 2013.
default Eurofound (2012), 
defaultNEETs- Young people not in employment, education or training: Characteristics, costs and policy  challenges
default, Dublin, available at http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/htmlfiles/ef1254.htm.
default Eurofound (2012), 
defaultNEETs- Young people not in employment, education or training: Characteristics, costs and policy  challenges
default, Dublin, available at http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/htmlfiles/ef1254.htm.
default European Commission (2013) 
defaultWorking together for Europe’s young people. A call to action on youth employment
default, Brussels, available at http://ec.europa.eu/social/BlobServlet?docId=10298&amp;langId=en.
default Eurofound (2012) 
defaultYouth Guarantee: Experiences from Finland and Sweden
default, Dublin, available at http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/htmlfiles/ef1242.htm.
default Eurofound (2012), Recent policy developments related to those not in employment, education and training (NEETs) , (http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/docs/erm/tn1109042s/tn1109042s.pdf).
default Eurofound (2012), E Effectiveness of policy measures to increase the employment participation of young people . http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/htmlfiles/ef1260.htm.
default The Council of the European Union (2013), Council recommendation of 22 April 2013 on establishing a Youth Guarantee (2013/C 120/01), Luxembourg, available at 
defaulthttp://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2013:120:0001:0006:EN:PDF.
default Eurofound (2012), 
defaultEffectiveness of policy measures to increase the employment participation of young people
default, Dublin, available at http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/htmlfiles/ef1260.htm.
default ILO (2012), 
defaultEurozone job crisis: Trends and policy responses
default, International Labour Office, Geneva, available at http://www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/---dgreports/---dcomm/documents/publication/wcms_184965.pdf
default