&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Freight on Rail (SRN 004)default&#xa0;defaultFreight on Rail thanks the Transport Select Committee for the opportunity to comment on its inquiry into the strategic road network.  We are commenting on 3 of the subject headings.
defaultA defaultHow defaultdoes the Government’s policy for roads link with planning for other transport modesdefault1. 
defaultThe Government must 
defaultlook at 
defaultmulti-modal 
defaultsolutions along 
defaultkey strategic corridors with significant lorry traffic, in order to meet its economic, environmental and safety g
defaultoals. 
default Therefore it must 
defaultconsider rail freight options in the route based strategies and in the feasibility studies. Because r
defaultoad and rail complement each other rail freight has a key role in helping the Government reduce road congestion
default and meet its road
default safety
default and emissions
default targets especially on key arterial freight routes. 
defaultRail 
defaultcan offer an alternative integrated solution for the T
defaultranspennine route, A303/A30 corridor, the A1 west and north of Newcastle and around Leeds
default.
default Multi-modal transport options should be evaluated to  
defaultaddress future problems including the five transport hotspots
default.
default 
default2. 
defaultRail freight alternatives were assessed to some extent in the A14 corridor study
default. 
defaultIn 2012, the intermodal analysis of the A14 corrido
defaultr showed that there was considerable suppressed demand for rail out of the Felixstowe port because of the current limitations of the rail network and it highlighted the value of implementing rail capacity upgrades on the A14. These enhancements were subseq
defaultuently included in the HLOS funding for the CP5 period. The evaluation showed that the extra capacity, would allow daily trains operations in and out of the port each day to increase from 30 to 50 which will increase rail’s market share increasing from 25%
default to around 38%. Furthermore, these upgrades will result in the removal of 40 million long distance lorry miles from the A14 corridor per annum. 
default3. 
defaultTargeted rail freight upgrades work; rai
defaultl’s market share out of Southampton port increased from 29-36% withi
defaultn a year of completion of the gauge upgrade demonstrating the direct benefits of rail enhancements
default.
default4. 
defaultThe CEO of HPUK, Clemence Cheung, told 
defaultthe Transport Select Committee hearing on Access to Ports
default 
defaultearlier in the year
default that improved rail capacity was key
default to Felixstowe port and would improve the competitive position of the port relative to ports such as Rotterdam. He said that less than three per cent of containers from the port were transported via the A14.
default5. defaultWork with rail freight industry defaultto achieve defaultindefaulttegrated solution defaultThe DfT Roads directorate should work with Network Rail
default, the Focs, RFG
default and the Rail Delivery Group to ensure that an integrated approach is adopted
default on key corridors as r
defaultail freight links are an important driver of economic regeneration w
defaulthich can help the Coalition Government meet its transport objective to promote the green sustainable economy with green jobs. 
default&#xa0;
defaultRFG/RFOA commissioned rail freight forecasts which showed that  traffic overall is expected to double in the period between 2010
default and 2030 with consumer traffic growing four fold.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs you will be aware, Network Rail has undertaken a comprehensive Freight market study
default which includes forecasts for growth, due to be released later this year which can be fed into these feasibility studies.
default&#xa0;
defaultPlanned defaultrdefaultail freight enhancements must be taken into accountdefaultIt is also crucial that the existing committed enhancements for the rail
default network are taken into consideration when planning the strategic road network. The Government has committed to a series of upgrades in the Control Period 5 which must be taken into account. 
default£200m for the Strategic (Rail) Freight Network (SFN)
defaultAdditionall
defaulty, the following projects are the main schemes which will benefit freight and passenger services:- 
defaultii) Reconstruction of Ely North Junction 
defaultiii) Leicester area capacity
defaultiv) Electric Spin – Southampton Port to Basingstoke, Basingstoke – Reading- Oxford –B
defaultanbury – Leamington Spa – Coventry
defaultv) Capacity upgrades to the West and East Coast Mainline
defaultvi) Great Western electrification
default&#xa0;
defaultReleased capacity on WCML for freight as a result of HS2 defaultThe benefits of using 
default at least three extra freight paths per hour off 
defaultpeak
default on the WCML from released capacity should be taken into account
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultBdefault. How can we improve the reliability and efficiency of travel on the strategic road network?default1. 
defaultShifting more freight to rail reduces road congestion
default and exposure to road collisions 
default 
defaultw
defaulthich c
defaultrucially 
defaultimproves 
defaultreliability as recognised by the Government Mode Shift grants system. The following statistics demonstrate the role rail has in alleviating road congestion; an average consumer freight train can remove up to 60 HGVs from our  roads 
defaultand an aggregates train can remove up to 130 HGVs from our roads. 
default2. defaultContradictions in DfT Freight Policy  defaultHowever, p
defaultolicies such as the  
defaultDfT’s decision to allow trials of 7ft longer lorries, 
defaultwhich its own research stated would 
defaultundermine
default rail freight a
defaultnd
default encourage more road freight
default,
default 
defaultcontradicts its stated policy to promote rail freight and reduce road collisions and pollution.  Because longer trailers will 
defaultresult in more external costs, more unreliability and more congestion on the strategic road network.
defaultThe DfT central case for longer trailers was built on the prediction that road operators will increase their share of goods traffic as a result of introducing longer lorries
default. 
defaultIn particular, consumer rail freight
default a key growth market
default,
default 
defaultwould
default,
default using the DfT figures be severely undermined
default,
default and forecasted growth would be cut by two thirds.
defaultDfT research stated - defaultLower rail use defaultwasdefault a major source of benefits in having longer trailersdefault&#xa0;defaultBetween 27% to 32% of the environmental benefits of longer trail
defaulters are assumed to be gained by running fewer trains. By 2025 - 84% of the industry operational savings would be from lower rail costs. 
defaultThe assessment is very sensitive to the way that less rail traffic translates into fewer train kilometers and a realisti
defaultc picture would be of external costs rising significantly. Also, if trains were electrified or became quieter, the benefits of not running them would fall and so would the benefits of longer trailers. 
defaultLonger trailers would undermine low carbon energy-effidefaultcient raildefault, particularly the emerging supermarket (domestic intermodal) rail traffic, the sector with the highest growth potential of up to 12 
defaulttimes in a 25 year period 
default. Even the DfT figures states that the 2 metre trailer would reduce rail freight growt
defaulth by two thirds (down from 732% to 262%) by 2025. This is because the relative costs of road and rail will be adversely affected by the new units, and rail will face a cost disadvantage; savings of up to 15% are predicted by some in the road haulage indust
defaultry. However the DfT suggest that this impact would be offset by rail operator being able to use longer intermodal units than at present, increasing their own efficiencies.  However, this assumes that customers will want to invest in such units, ahead of in
defaultvesting in road fleet and also that the existing equipment, much of which is new, can be written off. All this is likely to result in a downward spiral for rail freight in this sector as critical mass is lost.
defaultLonger trucks defaultcdefaultould mean more lorry miles not fewer defaultbecause demand will be stimulated as longer trailers would reduce road haulage costs by up to 13%. Distribution centre are likely to be rationalised, saving on real estate costs, with lorry tonne kilometres increasing a
defaults the same freight is carried further.
default 
defaultThe economic assumptions in the report are not realistic as they underestimate the extent to which longer vehicles will add to road mileage. 
defaultLonger trailers will be slower to negotiate road junctions and add to road defaultcongestiondefaultThe actual length of traffic lane occupied and the time that the lane is occupied needs to be fully taken into account. HGVs are considered to take up almost 4 times the space of an average car when stationery (passenger car units). Then one has
default to allow for the fact that HGVs are slower to negotiate junctions and need longer front and rear headway than cars as braking distances are greater.
defaultC  defaultWhat mechanisms are there for Government to increase investment in strategic roads and attract new investors. defaultAdefaultre there good examples from other countries that could be applied in the UK.default1. defaultDistance based lorry road user charging defaultFreight on Rail 
defaultsupports
default the principal of introducing a lorry road user charging system to ensure ensures fairer arrangements for the UK haulage industry. 
defaultAt present UK hauliers face unfair competition, with foreign hauliers not paying anything towards the costs of their use of U
defaultK roads. 
defaultHowever, we believe that the Government’s chosen time based system charges foreign hauliers too little, because of the EU restrictions, and 
defaultcould end up actually costing more in administration and enforcement than it raises. We believe that t
defaulthe Go
defaultvernment should instead have gone for a distance-based charging scheme, as most European countries are now doing. This would charge foreign lorries properly for using UK roads, and would raise revenue that could be used to fund a more efficient and greener
default UK freight industry. We therefore urge the Government to consider a comprehensive distance based system which could actually help reduce road congestion, emissions, accidents a
defaults well as raising revenue. 
defaultDisadvantages of the Time based system defaultbeing introddefaultuced next April 2014defaultGiven that foreign hauliers only account for 6% of UK vehicle miles, the administrative burden of this 
defaultscheme 
defaultboth for UK operators and DfT seems too high and could end up actually costing more in administration and enforcement than it
default raises.
defaultA simple but effective distance based  lorry road user charging scheme would therefore be fairer to UK hauliers but could also deliver wider objectives to:
default• Improve road safety
default• Reduce greenhouse gas emissions
default• Minimise the external costs from 
defaultheavy good vehicle traffic, including local air pollution, noise and congestion
default&#xa0;
defaultThe experience from Europe shows that lorry road user charging schemes can be introduced, that the technology is proven and that this delivers significant benefits, particular
defaultly to support the economy and reduce climate change – the two main objectives in the new Government’s transport policies.
default 
defaultThe German Maut system
default, developed within the Eurovignette guidelines, 
defaultreduced empty running by 11% down to under 20%, increased rail f
defaultreight by 7% and loaded runs by 2.1% in the ten year period up to 2010. 
defaulthttp://www.bettertransport.org.uk/campaigns/climate_change/roads/lorry-user-charging
defaultAppendixdefaultFurther benefits of rail freight which should be taken into account in transport infrastructure developmentdefaultFreight Transport: Average emissions in grams per tonne-kilometredefaultModedefaultPM10defaultCOdefaultNOxdefaultCO2defaultVOCdefaultRail
default0.004
default0.032
default0.31
default0.05
default0.021
defaultHGV
default0.048
default0.33
default1.74
default0.17
default0.15
defaultKey: 
defaultPM10 particulate matter of less than 10 microns; 
defaultCO carbon monoxide; 
defaultNOx oxides of nitrogen; 
defaultCO2 emissions
defaultVOC volatile organic compounds.
default&#xa0;
default Source RSSB 2007
defaultRoad maintenance costsdefaultRail freight saves sample county council 
default£750,000 in road repairs annually
defaultHGV movements 268,800: HGV millions of km 9,922: maintenance savings £770,700 (based on SLM values) 
defaultsource MTRU
default&#xa0;
default Potential changes from transfers of goods between rail and road 2006
defaultRail freight saves £133 million per annu
defaultm in road infrastructure costs – 
defaultDfT Freight Mode Shift Benefits Values Ap
defaultri
defaultl 2009 x lorry movements – ORR national rail trends by average mileage
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultEach consumer freight train can remove up to 60 HGVs from our roads. Network Rail 2013
default  Existing sized lorries are over four times more likely than cars to be involved in fatal collisions due to their size and weight. 
defaultTraffic 
defaultstatistics table 2010 TRA0104, Accident statistics Table RAS 30017, DfT
default R
defaultail freight produces 70% less carbon dioxide emissions than the equivalent road journey DfT Logistics Perspective P8 section 19,
default Action for Roads: A network for the 21
defaultst
default century, 
default16
defaultth
default July 2013 P20 section 2.8 
default DfT Action for Roads Our next steps P9
default 
defaultFinancial analysis  £70.7 million project having a Net Present value of £376m
default 
defaulthttp://www.networkrail.co.uk/improvements/planning-policies-and-plans/long-term-planning-process/market-studies/freight/
default Network Rail The Value of Rail Freight July 2010 Domestic intermodal growth highest forecast 1200% in  tonne km between 2006/07 and 2031
default