              
default              
defaultWritten defaultevidence submitted defaultby Alison WinterdefaultSummarydefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefault&#xa0;
default1. 
default  
defaultI am an independent human rights activist who has
default lived 
defaultand worked 
defaultas a volunteer 
defaulton 
defaultthe borders of Burma
default since 2004. During this time I have 
defaultbeen involved in many projects and tried to meet the needs of the people as best I can. The only thing that qualifies me and my colleagues to present our humble opinions to the Committee is our love for the country and peoples of Burma 
default(1)
default, our work for the people and our commitment to Human Rights.
default2.  
default 
defaultIn this submission I will attempt to include not only my own opinion but also the opinions of both Burmese activists
default, inside and outside the country,
default 
defaultand other colleagues I have worked alongside from various countries
default who have a passion for Burma and its people.
default We 
defaultwill attempt to address
default some of the questions in the terms of reference
default 
defaultthat relate to our combined knowledge,
default experience and 
defaultopinions. I have also laid out our combined thoughts as to the future of Burma and some suggestions as to how DFID could assist in that.
default3.
default default  Please read this submission as a series of practical suggestions and ideas compiled ‘from ground level’ as to how Democracy in Burma could be progressed and feel free to use or ignore any part. Many people we come into contact with do not see evidence that the reforms that have been spoken about and the words of the new ruling body of Burma are genuine, however we hope those words can become reality in the lives of the Burmese Public so that a genuine democracy with respect for the rights of its people can be achieved.  
defaultGood Governance and the Rule of Lawdefault&#xa0;default4. 
default  
defaultIt is in the best intere
defaultsts of society that good governance is put into place and Institutions are set up that address and respond to the needs of the people
default as it will enable all people of Burma
default 
defaultto participate actively in Government and in the established democratic Institutions. If good governance is not evident, the needs of society will not be 
defaultaddressed and 
defaultthe public 
defaultwill not be afforded the opportunity to participate in a meaningful way in Democratic Institutions.
default&#xa0;
default5.
default   defaultEffectively w
defaulte can say that more than anything else, Burma needs to come under the Rule of Law, not only nationally but internationally, complying with international standards and norms and fulfilling its obligations as signatories to the various conventions that have been signed in its history. In 2012 President 
defaultThein
default 
defaultSein
default stated that: “
defaultIf rule of law prevails in our society, human rights, liberty and democracy would flourish automatically.” 
default6. 
default  
defaultThe goal of a democratic system of government in Burma has not, and currently cannot be realised. The national constitution reserves 25% of seats for unelected military personnel in each of the two houses of parliament, and 30% in local governments. Until the constitution has been changed, no amount of UK government money, projects or programs will bring about a genuine and lasting chan
defaultge
default. 
defaultThe Military’s role in Good Governance default7.   
defaultMilitary and politics should be linked in the area of National Defence: let me be absolutely clear- there is no place for actively serving army personnel to sit in a ‘democratic’ parliament. All departments of the UK Government should be actively working towards a goal of seeing a parliame
defaultntary democracy in Burma where there is no military presence
default.
default8.   
defaultAs Burma has no international enemies and no current war with any other country, the State army of Burma should return to barracks and as with every country in a time of p
defaulteace, should only be called out on exercise, 
defaultto defend national frontiers or to assist or protect the people of Burma in the event of a natural disaster, such as cyclone 
defaultNargis
default in 2008. Whilst in barracks the army should undergo reforms by being retrained as to their role in a democratic country and should focus on eliminating all elements of impunity. All soldiers should be given clear and strict guidelines as to what they are allowed to do under law, and what constitutes abuse of the people. 
default9.   
defaultI would suggest that The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) are the experts in this field, and would recommend that they be allocated funding from DFID to put together a simple “Code of Conduct” for the Burma Army and education programme, to conduct field missions to ensure that all Burma Army personnel be made aware of this Code of Conduct and understand their obligati
defaultons under International and National Law
default. There should be effective punishment procedures outlined to this effect- clearly stating the penalties for ignoring or abusing their power. If DFID allocates funding to the ICRC for this purpose, funding must be enough to make this a nationwide, comprehensive project, perhaps with a view to extending this program to ethnic armies in the future. 
default10.   
defaultWe strongly recommend and advise that this be made a priority in DFID’s program, as the army are the main 
default‘
defaultsticking point
default’
default on a practical level currently to advancing towards the goal of democracy and development in Burma. 
default11.   
defaultIt is important to recognise that the less educated army personnel are, the easier it is for evil dictators to issue commands that are abusive to the people and break Geneva Conventions. Basic education should be given at the earliest and at every opportunity for these army personnel. They must be paid properly or they will be forced to resort to corruption and steal money from the public under various guises. They must be fed properly, or they will be forced to loot and steal villager’s livestock and crops. This does not mean, however that funding should be allocated as such, this is not a foreign government’s role, but should be addressed by the Burmese governing bodies and be included in army reform.
default12.   
defaultThe presence of the military, especially in ethnic areas, should be reduced, rather than as is currently happening in Karen State 
default(among others) 
defaultwhere t
defaulthe army is capitalising
default on the “ceasefire” by reinforcing its troops and building up its camps. There should not be any need for army presence on the streets or in civilian areas. Law enforcement should be in the hands of the police force.
defaultConstitution, Civil Society and Advocacydefault13.   
defaultIn 1947 when General 
defaultAung
default San, one of the founding fathers of the Union of Burma and National hero, returned from the UK after discussing constitution change with our government, he stayed up all night and in the morning produced a new constitution. His premise was that we do not need to reinvent the wheel, in other words just take 
defaultthe best and most suitable parts of constitutions already in existence. This is in stark contrast to the current regime who took 16 years to write the current constitution- the longest constitution writing committee in his
defaulttory as far as I know. We hope that Daw 
defaultAung
default San 
defaultSuu
default 
defaultKyi
default will 
defaultproceed
default 
defaultmore along the lines of her father, 
defaultAung
default San, and we need to support her in this.
default14.   
defaultIn this way the Civil Society movement 
defaultcould have
default a large role to play in advocacy. During the DFID program of 20
default10-2011 funding civil society, we
default heard a lot of effective work going on and heard a lot of promotion of civil society. That was refreshing and effective on many levels. In my opinion the funding
default should be
default concentrated on advocacy from inside the country. I would suggest that DFID reinstate this program focusing on advocacy projects for Burmese advocates in country. This will aid the constitutional amendment process and 
defaultencourage more people from civil society to be involved in the process of shaping their country’s future.
defaultPolice and Judiciarydefault15.   
defaultBurmese society has many elements: among the most important in a political context is the issue of “face”. Being under military dictatorship for so long has created a society in Burma that is very much based on relationships as opposed to rules. This has penetrated the culture in almost every aspect and is the main reason why so much corruption has been allowed to fester in every sphere, and is 
defaultalso 
defaultthe reason why there is space in society for the ‘Rule of Fear’ as opposed to the rule of law.  If society is based on a set of rules there is much less chance for corruption to penetrate.
default16.   
defaultA successful democracy needs an independent, non-corrupt police force in which 
defaultthe public
default can have trust and confidence.  
defaultIdeally a police force should be independent of government, but accountable to government. The MPF
default, as we 
defaultclearly
default saw
default in the recent race-hate riots in various places across Burma, especially in 
defaultMyitkyina
default, are able to act with impunity and free to carry out their duties or not as they so desire. I would again suggest a similar ‘Code of Conduct’ be researched, taught and established within the police force.
default17.   
defaultBurma has many different regions and comprises of majority and minority ethnic groups. Therefore consideration should be given to setting up regional and central police forces which would complement each other.  Ideally law enforcement in each of the ‘States’ should be conducted by members of the ethnic group of that state- i.e.: Karen State should have police officers recruited from the Karen population, etc.
default&#xa0;
default18.   
defaultWe would also suggest that a ‘Police Academy’ should be set up to establish standards and competency, whereby new recruits would be trained and introduced to the standards required of them. We would suggest a grant should be given to see how this can be achieved. 
default&#xa0;
default19.   
defaultPolice personnel should be paid a proper salary to ensure there is no need to indulge in corruption
default. T
defaulthe current system of civilian militia forces should be dismantled within a legal framework systematically. Again the focus should be on education (or re-education). 
default20.   
defaultAnything DFID can do to achieve these goals in a practical way would be welcome.
default21.   
defaultI would refer 
defaultthe IDC and 
defaultDFID to Andrew 
defaultSelth’s
default excellent recent report, “Police reform in Burma: Aims, Obstacles and Outcomes” 
default(2) 
defaultand his former research. I suggest DFID use this research and expertise in considering how it can aid police and judicial reform and work with the Griffith Institute to that end.
default22.   
defaultReforming the Judiciary is a huge and complex job, however hopefully the starting of this work should follow 
defaultgovernmental, army and 
defaultpolice reform. People love to feel pride in their work and job satisfaction, therefore if good governance and incorruptibility are promoted as a source of such pride within the armed forces and MPF the jud
defaulticiary should follow
default 
defaultsuite
default. 
default23.   
defaultIdeally a very important part of judicial reform should be the introduction of a jury system of judgement. We know from many parts of the words that this seems to be the fairest way to conduct trials. Participants should be selected by local immigration officials from every State and Division systematically. This would then deplete the 
defaultabsolute 
defaultpower of a judge and lessen the chances of a corrupt trial. 
default 
default24.   
defaultA system should be introduced whereby judiciary who do not involve themselves in corruption are 
defaultrecognised and rewarded as such and can take pride in their fairness and the principles of law and justice that they uphold.
default 
default25.   
defaultIn March 1988 a student called Phone Maw was murdered by State forces in a Tea shop in Rangoon. This event was 
defaultone of the 
defaultcatalyst
defaults
default for the student uprising in August of that year. The person appointed to be Investigation Commission Chairman assigned to the case was U Tin 
defaultAung
default 
defaultMyint
default 
defaultOo
default.
default He has been acclaimed since then for revealing truth and fighting for justice
default. Another example
default would be 
defaultU 
defaultKo
default Yu who
default was a
default 
defaultlecturer at the Department of Law, Rangoon Arts and Science
default University and
default a well known lawyer and writer since 1960s.
default 
defaultHe took no legal fee for poor people. Intellectuals, university students and legal professionals hono
defaultu
defaultr him as their hero.
default We would suggest a National award and prize fund be created in honour of one of Burma’s heroes in the sphere of justice and revealing truth, and awarded to members of the legal profession and judiciary on an annual basis by a prize-giving committee. 
default&#xa0;
defaultGovernment and Other Institutionsdefault&#xa0;
default26.   
defaultOver the years, due to many differing human rights abuses, many people in Burma have gone missing. This includes child and adult soldiers, 
defaultformer 
defaultpolitical prisoners, porters and forced labourers, over the Saffron revolution of 2007 at least a truck load of monks went missing and are yet to be accounted for, trafficked children and countless people who have been ‘disappeared’ over the years. Last month due to extreme flooding in Karen State up to 600 people from 
defaultMyawaddy
default area are still alleged to be 
default‘missing’
default.
default&#xa0;
default 
default27.   
defaultA grant should be given to facilitate the setting up of a Central Institution for missing persons.  This Institution would compile records of missing people – thereby assisting other family members 
defaultand friends 
defaultin o
defaultbtaining relevant information. 
defaultThis is a practical solution and, with the assistance of modern technology, records could be compiled and maintained.
default 
default&#xa0;
default28. The setting up of a ‘Truth and Reconciliation Commission’ should be properly researched and considered.  
default&#xa0;
default28.   We are
default aware that one of the means of communication in highlighting human rights abuses in Burma 
defaulthas been by comedians and artists. We can refer back to
default the United States when the Roosevelt administration brought in measures which endeavoured to address and overcome the problems caused by The Great Depression in America.  The Government set up an Arts Institution with the objective of communicating to the general public their aspirations to overcome the consequences of the Great Economic Depression, and to communicate to its citizens what t
defaulthey were endeavouring to do. 
default29.   We
default believe money would be very well spent in setting 
defaultup or funding an already existing
default 
default‘
defaultCommunications Centre
default’ or ‘Centre for the Arts’
default which could be used by the best artists in Burma to communicate the objecti
defaultves of democracy
default. There could also be a children's section for the schools. 
default&#xa0;
default30.   
defaultApart from looking to the future and democracy in Burma, artists could be given a commission to produce works that depict the history and past sufferings of the Nation – including those who were tortured and those who were murdered in 1988.  Such commission may honour those who died and suffered, and also give comfort to their loved ones
default. We
default believe money spent in setting up such a project would be central to promoting democracy in Burma
default and the participation and confidence of the general public and would clearly address the question as to if these reforms in Burma are genuine.
default&#xa0;
defaultPracticalities and Staffingdefault&#xa0;
default32.   A wise man once said to me “never trust a field worker whose feet are not dirty”. DFID should employ people who have a 
defaultgenuine love and compassion defaultfor Burma and its people, and have demonstrated such in their previous experience. There must be more field workers and less office staff. Staff should be prepared to ‘go the extra mile’ to meet the needs of the people if necessary and see with their own eyes where and how UK government money is being used. If DFID is doing this- we believe its work will be effective. 
default&#xa0;
default33.   Finally we would like to thank the Commons Select Committee and the Department for International Development for their work, and for allocating this funding to be used in Democracy and Development in Burma. We really hope that it can help make a difference to the lives of many people.
default&#xa0;
defaultNotes:
default&#xa0;
default(1)
default   For the purpose of this submission when referring to the ‘people of Burma’, I mean anyone born in Burma and by ‘Burmese’ I include all ethnic groups.
default&#xa0;
default(2)
default 
defaultAvailable online at: 
defaulthttp://www.griffith.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/512379/Regional-Outlook-Paper-44-v.2-Selth.pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default