              
default              
defaultWritten evidence submitted by thedefault Trades Union Congressdefault&#xa0;
defaultSummarydefaultIntroductiondefaultThe TUC represents almost 6 million workers and 54 affiliated trade unions.  The TUC welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Committee of Inquiry into Democracy and Development in Burma as the TUC, through the International Tr
defaultade Union Confederation (ITUC),
default and our affiliated unions have a considerable history of working with trade union partners in Burma to support the emergence of democracy and combat the infringement of trade union and human rights. DFID’s stated intention to significantly increase funding to bilateral aid to 
defaultBurma
default is welcome, however, a number of important challenges exist in Burma which must be addressed in any future aid programme work.  We will address these concerns in our responses below to the questions supplied by the Committee 
defaultwhere
default we felt best placed to answer. 
defaultOne of the key developments in 
defaultBurma has been the
default Labour Organizations Law (2011) which made it possible for free trade unions to register and operate for the first time in decades. 
defaultThe union movement has since developed rapidly with 670 labour organisations registered under the law, mostly small unions at enterprise level and concentrated in agriculture, manufacturing and transport, with an estimated total membership of 200,000 workers.
defaultHowever, significant obstacles remain in law and practice for workers and unions to exercise the right to fr
defaulteedom of association, to organis
defaulte and to bargain 
defaultcollectively. Burma has 
defaultonly ratified two of the eight core labour s
defaulttandards
default.  It is important that DFID urges the Gov
defaulternment of Burma to ratify all c
defaultore labour standards and promote decent work.
defaultAnti-union discrimination, and the lack of effective mechanisms to remedy such violations, remains a key problem. A flawed trade union law, and dispute settlement law, create serious challenges for the registration and operation of trade unions, as well as the development of collective bargaining and mature industrial relations. Forced labour, while on the decline, still persists in some regions; further, many of those responsible for these crimes have yet to face appropriate sanction.   This has been documented by the ITUC, 
defaultwhich
default regards the situation for workers as serious and continues to keep Burma on its list of Countries at Risk.
default  
defaultThere is a pressing need for DFID to provide support to Burma’s new trade union movement in the form of capacity building, training on advocacy/industrial relations, legal expertise and support for staffing and organisers.  We would encourage DFID to engage with our union 
defaultpartners
default in Burma – the Internati
defaultonal Trade Union Confederation and the national trade union centre, 
defaultthe Federation of Trade Unions – Myanmar (FTUM)
default.    
defaultDFID should also work with
default the Global Union Federations representing manufacturing (
defaultIndustriALL
default), transport (ITF), food and agriculture (IUF), education (EI) and woodworking, forestry and construction (BWI)
default which are able to liaise directly with 
defaultsectoral
default trade unions
default.  Working with the ILO’s Liaison Office, and in particular the Freedom of Association project, will also be essential.
defaultCivil and political rights have been defined as a strategic priority in DFID’s Operational Plan 2011 – 2015
default for Burma.  As Burma increasingly becomes an attractive destination for investors, it is important for DFID’s work to encourage companies to comply with the UN Guiding Principles and OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises so that new investment does not 
defaultenable
default the abuse of labour rights through supply chain
defaults
default. 
defaultThe trade union movement has worked actively with the governments of the United States and European Union to develop rules on due diligence and disclosure (US) and a parliamentary resolution (EU) on the same. However, much remains to be done to ensure that enterprises doing business in Burma respect international human rights norms. DFID is already playing a role in this area through the Institute for Human Rights and Business. However, more 
defaultremains to be done beyond promotion of principles to ensure that the Guiding Principles and OECD Guidelines are observed and enforced in Burma.  The trade unions have and will continue to play a major role in that process.
defaultThe TUC believes DFID should work more closely with trade unions and encourage binding measures to ensure UK companies investing in Burma, 
defaultabide by the UN Guiding Principles
default.  This would progress DFID’s strategic priority to strengthen civil and political rights. 
default 
defaultTrade unions are crucial to a country’s democracy as they give workers a voice over their conditions at work and in society.  Given the obstacles that continue for trade unions in Burma, it is essential that DFID supports trade unions to organise freely and advocate for their rights at work. 
defaultTo date, DFID has not supported the nascent but quickly growing trade union movement in Burma. Much assistance is necessary for trade unions to participate meaningfully in this important, transitional period in the country’s history. Support for legislative advocacy, on issues related to fundamental rights, wage setting, occupational safety and health, generally and 
defaultsectorally
default, is sorely needed.  The TUC believes DFID should provide support to trade unions in Burma, as leading civil society organisations that can help to create and maintain social cohesion and effective industrial relations. 
default5default. DFID has initiated significant economic governance work over the last 2 years, including on extractive industries transparency, natural resource management more widely, and public financial management.default&#xa0;default How effective is this work and what should DFID do in future?defaultThe TUC supports DFID’s promotion of responsible business practice in Burma, however feels that binding measures are required in order to ensure British companies comply with the UN Guiding Principles and OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises. In April 
defaultthe TUC General Secretary
default wrote to 
defaultthe Foreign Secretary 
defaultencouraging him to support the ITUC’s proposals for a Commission for Responsible Investment to be established in Burma.
default The Commission would require enterprises joining to undertake a thorough and credible human rights due diligence process, assessing any actual or potential adverse impacts associated with that trade or investment, including business 
defaultrelationships, and publish that asses
defaultsment on a 
defaultcentralis
defaulted
default website maintained by the Commission prior to establishing the investment and thereafter. Enterprises would also be required to disclose publicly their direct or indirect business relationships including their supply chains within Burma on this site. The Commission would provide mediation/conciliation services regarding breaches of human rights. The commission would be overseen by an advisory board including representatives of civil society, government and business.  
default&#xa0;
defaultImportant elements of this c
defaultoncept were incorporated into the 
defaultMay 2013 EP Resolution, which called for large European enterprises to conduct due diligence and to disclose the results of those processes. ITUC is working with the EP currently to determine how best to give effect to this Resolution.
default&#xa0;
defaultLand confiscation also remains a very serious problem, as peasant farmers are ejected from their land to make way for new infrastructure projects meant to attract investment
default.
default Indeed, Special 
defaultRapporteur
default Tomas Ojeda recently stated, “Given the expected wave of privatizations and the increase in foreign investment, along with accelerated economic development, there is likely to be an increase in land confiscations, development-induced displacement and other violations of economic, social and cultural rights. Burma has an obligation to refrain from and protect against forced evictions from homes and land.”
default Indeed, protests over the expansion of a copper mine, 
defaulta joint project between the Burmese military and Chinese weapons manufacturer, turned violent last year.  
defaultThe 
defaultBurmese military used white phosphorous to displace the protestors, leaving dozens 
defaultinjured,
default some with severe burns.
default The protestors denounced the 
default"unlawful confiscation" of more than 7,800 acres of land and a large number of forced evictions to allow for the mine's expansion.  
defaultThe TUC believes DFID should work to ensure that land grabs and displacement of local people do not occur in areas of new investment, particularly where extractive industries locate. 
default6default.Whatdefault role should DFID play in helping to resolve ethnic tensions? defaultThe TUC is concerned by the ongoing conflicts in the regions especially in the states of 
defaultArakan
default, 
defaultKachin
default, Karen and 
defaultShan.There
default is an opportunity for the international community, including DFID, to encourage the government of Burma/Myanmar to engage with the United Nationalities Federal Council as the current policy of ‘national solidarity’ is deliberately aimed at quashing any talk of autonomy. Claims that aid is being blocked to the ethnic minorities and 
defaultBurman
default are being moved to ethnic states to alter the demographics have to be addressed. DFID can help by facilitating talks.  The TUC is concerned 
defaultby
default the 
defaultarmy’s involvement in atrocities in ethnic regions 
defaultthat have
default been recorded by various agencies. 
defaultDFID must work with trade unions to promote an awareness of human rights and help provide access to redress for victims of abuse.
default7default. defaultHowdefault effectively is DFID working with the FCO and other UK Government Departments, and how might this improve?defaultThe TUC believes DFID and FCO could improve their work 
defaultdeveloping
default free civil society 
defaultorganisations
default by supporting the
default capacity of free and independent trade unions.  
defaultDFID should
default also
default 
defaultsupport the joint strategy FCO and 
defaultBIS 
defaultlaid out in the report 
defaultGood Business – Implementing the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
default in Burma
default through the introduction of binding requirements on investors
default to uphold the UN Guiding Principles, as discussed in Question 5
default.
default   
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember
default 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=1000:11110:0::NO:11110:P11110_COUNTRY_ID:103159
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.ituc-csi.org/IMG/pdf/survey_ra_2013_eng_final.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/209271/Burma.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.tuc.org.uk/international-issues/countries/burma/human-rights/responsible-investment-burma
default 
default UNGA Report, supra 
defaultfn
default 6, at pp. 9-11.
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/236901/BHR_Action_Plan_-_final_online_version_1_.pdf
default 
default