&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence defaultsubmitted by the RSPBdefault defaultThe RSPB welcomes the opportunity to provide evidence to the 
defaultEnvironmental Audit 
defaultCommittee inquiry into 
defaultbiodiversity offsetting. 
defaultSummarydefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefault1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe UK National Ecosystem Assessment provides a comprehensive 
defaultaccount of how the natural environment and its biodiversity provide us with services that are critical to our wellbeing and economic prosperity
default. 
defaultDespite this, biodiversity 
defaultis being continually eroded and fragmented by inappropriate development
default. T
defaulthe 
defaultplanning system does not adequately guard against biodiversity loss; the mitigation hierarchy is inconsistently applied
default,
default and where compensation does take place it is often inadequate and short-lived. 
default2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAt the same time, there is an acute s
defaultocial need for mor
defaulte housing, alongside
default better infrastructure for business
default. Despite this,
default the planning system is
default often
default slow and cumbersome. It is, therefore, only right that Government explores ways in which to make the planning system more fit for purpose, so that it can de
defaultliver truly sustainable development. 
defaultThe
defaultre is undoubtedly potential
default for 
defaulta new
default system 
defaultthat could take
default a
default systematic account of the value 
defaultof
default nature, 
defaultsave money for business, and
default increase speed in
default a simpler
default planning system
default. 
default3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHowever, the Government’s preferred
default options raise a series of 
defaultsignificant concerns that
default will need to be addressed before a
defaultny new
default system is established.  
defaultIn particular, o
defaultffsetting must only be established as part of a coherent strengthening of the mitigation hierarchy; it must be supported b
defaulty real, independent ecological expertise at a local level; it must be applied uniformly across developments; and it must be underpinned by a long-term financial and legal framework for monitoring, reporting and implementation. If this can be achieved, biod
defaultiv
defaultersity offsetting can deliver
default potential benefits for econo
defaultmy, society and environment. Conversely,
default if 
defaultt
defaulthese issues cannot be addressed, biodiversity offsetting 
defaultrisks serious damage to our natural environment.
defaultThe mdefaultitigation hierarchy default4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultRecreating complex 
defaultnatural processes is inherently difficult and full of risk. Essentially, you are guaranteeing ecological loss in return for uncertain gains.
default Even if the offset is successful, in many cases there will be a temporal loss of biodiversity that can never be ret
defaultrieved.
default As such, in-situ conservation is always preferable. 
default5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThat offsetting biodiversity loss is incredibly difficult is evidenced 
defaultby the fact that there are no systems in the world that have been able to demonstrate no net loss of biodiversity, and t
defaulthe w
defaultealth of studies showing (often considerable) net-
default losses
default. 
defaultIndeed, we would seriously 
defaultquestion the repeated statements in the Impact Assessment
default,
default that offsetting wil
defaultl ‘improve biodiversity’, given the 
defaultabsence of any evidence to support this statement.  
default 
default6.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIt is because of the uncertainty and risk associated with offsetting that the mitigation hierarchy must be adhered to
default, as required by the National Planning Policy Framework (NPPF)
default. O
defaultffse
defaulttting should
default only ever
default be
default undertaken when a development is absolutely 
defaultnecessary, and all attempts to avoid harm or mitigate it have been exhausted. 
defaultWe welcome the statements in the Green Paper that the mitigation hierarchy is adhered to, but this assertion is undermined and contradicted by the explicit desire for offsetting 
defaultto free up more land on site for development (because mitigation will no longer be necessary). This is a blatant
default disregard of
default the mitigation hierarchy
default,
default to which we strongly object.
default7.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe would consider 
defaultthe failure of LPAs to avoid and mitigate harm from devel
defaultopment to be a far more serious problem for biodiversity than the poor implementation of any necessary compensation. This is largely due to a culture of not va
defaultluing biodiversity and not giving
default due weight to policies concerned with biodiversity – a point su
defaultpported by Defra commissioned research into the implementation of PPS9
default. 
defaultGovernment must
default ensure that LPAs and the Planning Inspectorate give appropriate weight to biodiversity policies, just as they do to, for example, housing policies. 
default8.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultLPAs need better g
defaultuidance on how to avoid and mitigate harm, and it is crucial that a single guidance document is published on every aspect of the mitigation hierarchy. This must contain very clear guidance on how to assess harm, avoid harm, mitigate harm, and finally – off
defaultse
defaultt 
defaultharm
default. 
defaultEdefaultcological expertisedefault within planning authorities default default9.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe metric applied to offsetting is merely a simple articulation of what will often be a complex decision. 
defaultIt takes significant ecological expertise to be able to assess the ‘value’ of a site an
defaultd to understand how, or if, its loss can be compensated.
default Such an exercise will necessarily requi
defaultre a degree of judgement, and while it is the responsibility of the developer to provide the initial assessment, 
defaultthe LPA cannot fulfil its role as a competent d
defaultecision-maker if it is unable to verify the information. 
default10.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe world of land use planning is highly contested by a myriad of different interests, and the integrity of the planning system depends on independent arbitration. Moreover, the public’s faith in th
defaulte 
defaultsystem
default depends on independent arbitration. The decision to approve an 
defaultapplication may hinge on matters relating to biodiversity and it would be unacceptable for a LPA to have to sim
defaultply accept the developer’s recommendation on offsetting – even if the rep
defaultort is written by an ‘accredited’ expert. 
defaultAccredited or otherwise, a consultant is ultimately being paid
default by a developer
default -
default 
defaultwho will have
default a clear vested interest in obtaining planning permission.
default 
defaultWe would strongly recommend a system of accreditation but this cannot be a substitute for LPA ecological expertise. Many planning consultants are ‘accredited’ by the Royal Town Planning Institute (RTPI), but no-one would seriously suggest 
defaultthat this negates
default the need for local authority planning officers. It is equally unacceptable for LPAs not to have any ecological expertise, simply because consultants are accredited. 
default11.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultOne of the potential benefits of an
default offsetting system would be
default the strategic choice of of
defaultfs
defaultet type and location, involving
default the replacement of lower value habitat with higher value habitats
default (higher value habitats should generally be replaced like for like)
default. While certain habitats are of national importance (and this needs to be reflected in any
default metric
defaults), ‘value’ will vary according to local
default ecological
default context. 
defaultEcological expertise
default is therefore needed 
defaultto ensure that local metric
defaults reflect local value, and strategic plans maximise opportunities for enhancing the local ecological network with offset
defaults. 
default12.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultGiven the critical importance of local authority ecological expertise in both reducing risk and maximising potential benefits associated with offsets, it is highly alarming that less t
defaulth
defaultan 30% 
defaultof local authorities have any ecological expertise. 
defaultAll loca
defaultl authorities must have ready access to independent ecological expertise before a biodiversity offsetting system can be reliably implemented.
default 
default  
defaultThe importance of adefault mandatory defaultsystemdefault13.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultLargely because it is 
defaultrequired as part of an environmental impact assessme
defaultnt (EIA), there will generally be an explicit process of assessing the potential impacts of a major planning application on bi
defaultodiversity. However, for applications
default that
default are 
defaulteither 
defaultoutside of protected areas
default or
default 
defaultthat 
defaultfail to meet the required threshold for a
defaultn EIA, 
defaultbiodiversity is infrequently considered and assessments of potential harm are often poor
default. 
defaultThis is a major factor in
default the alarming losses of wildlife 
defaultoutside of protected areas. Losses of biodiversity and the fragmentation of habitats outside of 
defaultprotected areas
default,
default also have a significant negative impact on our protected area network
default. 
default14.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe share the Government’s desire for a faster and simpler planning system that brings forward the sustainable development that society needs. A faster system depends 
defaulton increased simplicity, and the system will only become simpler for all users
default,
default if all users are using the same system. It is very difficult to reconcile the Government’s contradictory desire for a 
defaultsimple system, and 
defaultfor developers to be able to opt out an
defaultd use a different system. A new method will only make the planning system simpler if everyone in the planning
default system uses it.
default15.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultNor will a scheme deliver effective protection for biodiversity if a threshold is applied below which developers will not be requi
defaultred to participate. 
defaultA
default standard and explicit system for assessing potential harm to biodiversity would
default 
default only bring margin
defaultal conservation benefits if solely
default applied to major developments; whereas there would be significant benefits if
default it was
default applied to all n
defaultew housing development, new commercial buildings and to large commercial extensions. 
defaultWe recognise that direct participation in an offsetting scheme may be prohibitively expensive for some of the smallest developers—in such cases, it may be possible to impl
defaultement a form of the Community Infrastructure Levy, where businesses 
defaultwould pay a levy to the local planning authority which would then strategically offset any unavoidable damage associated with the development.
defaultMetricsdefault16.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere must be a consistent framework 
defaultfor local authorities to produce their own metrics within an offsetting supplementary planning document. This is because the value of a habitat may vary depending on context. For example, woodland may be
default extremely
default rare in an urban authority and this would 
defaultneed to be reflected in 
defaultthe ‘score’
default used
default to express its value.
default17.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere must also be national guidelines that set minimum scores for
default nationally important
default priority habitats and species
default, so that, for example, a local authority in Dorset could not set a low sco
defaultre for 
defaultnationally rare 
defaulthe
defaultathland
default,
default on the basis that it is
default not considered rare in that district. 
default18.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultS
defaultpecies should 
defaultalso 
defaultbe included in
default any future
default metric
defaults, and this needs to be accompanied by much better data on general populations, so that the value of a loca
defaultl population can be determined. Storing all data collected as part of a new standardised system, both for existing/ lost sites and for offsetting sites, could be hugely beneficial in this regard. This data should be stored nationally by Natural England, vi
defaulta LPAs. 
defaultProtectiondefault and management of offset sites default19.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFor offsetting to stand any chance of
default avoiding net losses,
default 
defaultsites must be protected and managed 
defaultover ecologically relevant timeframes. 
default20.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultNatural processes require
default very l
defaultarge areas of natural land that are 
defaultseldom found in England
default. Unfortunately, this renders most habitats in need of continual management and this would be the case for most offset sites, thus making ongoing management an additional cost
default 
defaulton top of the upfront costs 
defaultassociated with creating the 
defaulthabitat
default. 
default21.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultManagement costs must be secured 
defaulti
defaultf the offset site is to stand any chance of avoiding a net-loss of biodiversity.
default A recent example from Scotland
default, involving a European protected site and Scottish Coal, highlights the dangers: Scottish Coal were g
defaultranted permission to mine,
default on the condition that 
defaultthey restore the site after use, only for Scottish coal to then declare
default bankrupt
defaultcy.
default 
default22.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn order to overcome the danger of either the developer or the offset provider ceasing to operate (there is a danger this 
defaultcould be premeditated) it is critically important that monies are collected prior to the commencement of development and this money is paid into a trust fund. 
defaultWe recommend
default that this trust fund is operated by one of 
defaultDefra’s
default agencies – preferably Natural 
defaultEng
defaultland. This would enable additional oversight and the ability to withhold funds if the offset provider was not meeting the conditions of their agreement. 
defaultClear responsibility and the ability to enforcedefault23.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWithout clear legal and financial arrangements in place at the outset, there is no guarantee that an offsetting provision would be reliable. 
defaultThere must be a robust legal agreement that sets out clear responsibility for the implementation and management of 
defaultan offset. 
defaultCritically, this has to enable enforcement to be taken against a specified party at any time
default,
default for the duration of the agreement. 
defaultIn particular, i
defaultt must also be possible to take punitive action against a third-party that 
defaultfails to fulfil its obligations. 
defaultAs such, it is
default inconceivable that a third-party would not be bound by a legal agreement at the planning stage, as the delivery of the offset is integral to the decision to grant planning permission. It is, therefore, alarmi
defaultng that the Green Paper suggests
default that provision of an offset by a third-party could avoid the need for detailed requirements
default regarding compensatory measures in s106 or similar agreements. You cannot grant planning permission, subject to a legal agreement,
default if the legal agreement does not secure all
default of
default the measures necessary to make the development acceptable. 
default24.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIf the granting of planning permission is dependent on satisfactory offsetting,
default there must
default also
default be a clear legal responsibility on the competent auth
defaultority to enforce the offset for the duration of the agreement, with this being the LPA in most cases. 
defaultHowever, 
defaultit may be advantageous from a conservation perspective for the offsetting to
default take
default place outside of the local authority where the development take
defaults place
default and permission is
default granted
default.
default 
defaultClarification would be
default needed 
defaultas to how enforcement action could
default be taken 
defaultin such circumstances, if, for example, a management agreement was not being adhered to. 
default25.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFurthermore, if 
defaultcommuted sums are 
defaulttaken
default by LPAs
default for small
defaulter developments (to enable cumulative funding for strategic offsetting)
default in lieu of any offset 
defaultprov
defaultision, the monies must be 
defaultring-fenced
default and used for conservation
default, and there must be a robust legal agreement in place with the subsequent offset provider
default -
default tha
defaultt 
defaultcan
default be enforced through a civil mechanism. 
defaultEnsuring defaultadditionalitydefault default26.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAny offsetting provision must be additional to any existing statutory or policy obligations. For example, this means that it would not be acceptable for aftercare from a minerals site (t
defaulthat was a conditi
defaulton of the permission) to be used to offset harm fr
defaultom another development, as the aftercare
default was necessary to offset the harm from the mineral extraction. However, the aftercare agreement would typically be time limited, and 
defaultin some circumst
defaultances 
defaultwe would be comfortable for the site to be sold as an offset once the planning obligation had expired, 
defaultif
default this would secure additional funding 
defaultnecessary 
defaultto manage the site. 
defaultLikewise, it would be unacceptable for Government to 
defaultgenerate funds needed to 
defaultfulfil its existing obligations for managing protected sites
default through offsetting
default. Neither would it be acceptable to use 
defaultagri
default-environment funded work to offset harm elsewhere, during the timeframe of the agreement. The integrity of t
defaulthe system depends on 
defaultadditionality
default and without 
defaultadditionality
default we will end up with severe net-losses of biodiversity. 
default27.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIt is also important to avoid offset provision being ‘double-sold’. This will require a central register, preferabl
defaulty
default maintained by Natural 
defaultEngland,
default 
defaultthat holds details of all offset provision. 
defaultMonitoringdefault28.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultOne of the main benefits of introducing a standard system is that it enables effective monitoring
default and analysis
default of net changes. This means that Natural England should be requi
defaultred to collect th
defaulte data
default of the
default initial assessment of the s
defaultite, in order to understand what has been lost
default. There must also be a legal agreement as part of the planning consent that requires the submission of monitoring reports of the offset to the LPA
default. These should also be 
defaultstandardised so that the assessments of the site follows the same criteria as those used when deciding whether or not to offset. This data should in turn be submitted to Natural England. Understanding changes in the extent of different habitats will also b
defaulte necessary to inform the revisi
defaulton of criteria for valuing habitats, as value may change according to changes in extent
default.
defaultOffset type and locationdefault default29.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHigh value habitats must be protected accordingly. T
defaulthis means that permission 
defaultshould only be granted on sites
default that have a high ‘score’ in exceptional circumstances. The bar for what constitutes necessary development should rise commensurate with the score - and the likelihood of granting permission should decrease. 
defaultFurthermore, i
defaultf a high value habitat is lost, we
default would expect that habitat to be replaced like-for-like, wherever possible. 
default30.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultF
defaultor sites with lower scores 
default(
defaultespecially smaller sites
default), offsetting with a higher value habitat in a strategic location could lead to significant ecological gains. 
defaultIn order to maxi
defaultmise this potential, neighbouring LPAs should work with each other and with their Local Nature Partnerships
default, to identify strategic locations where cumulative offsetting could do most to improve ecological connectivity and deliver landscape-scale conservat
defaultion. This strategy should then be embedded in the LPAs SPD for offsetting.
default31.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
default 
defaultHowever, while strategically locating offsets has the potential to deliver ecological gains, distancing communities 
defaultfrom biodiversity can also incur
default a social cost.
default 
default 
defaultFor instance, t
defaultaking a small wildlife reserve from an ecologically deprived location could have a significantly negative impact on that community’s quality of life.  LPAs will need to carefully balance the needs of people and wildlife, and these trade-offs should be expl
defaulticitly addressed when 
defaultplanning for the strategic implementation of offsets. 
default&#xa0;
default16 October 2013
default&#xa0;
default Watson and 
defaultAlbon
default, 2011, The UK National Ecosystem Assessment: Synthesis of Key Findings
default 
defaultO
defaultver 40% of 
defaultEngland’s priority species, 30% of priority habitats
default and 30% of ecosystem services are still declining
default, while eight priority species were lost entirely between 2002 and 2008
default.
default 
defaultMerono-Mateus
default et al (2012) Structural and functional loss in restored wetlan
defaultd ecosystems, 
defaultPLOS Biology
default; 
defaultBenDor
default (2009) A dynamic analysis of wetland mitigation process and its effects on no net loss policy,
default Landscape Urban Planning
default ; 
defaultHossler
default et al(2011) No net loss for nutrient function in salt marshes
default, 
defaultEcosphere
default;
default 
defaultBull et al (2013) Biodiversity offsets in theory and practice, 
defaultOryx
default; 
defaultSuding
default (2011) Towards restoration in ecology: success, failure, and opportunities ahead, 
defaultAnnual Review of Ecology, Evolution and Systems;
default 
defaultGibbons (2010) The case for biodiversity offsets,
default 
defaultDecision Point
default. Matthews &amp; 
defaultEndress
default (2008) Performance criteria, compliance success, and vegetation development in compensatory wetlands, 
defaultEnvironmental Management;
default Quigley &amp; Harper (2006a) Compliance with Canada’s Fisheries Act: a field audit of habitat co
defaultmpensation projects; 
defaultQ
defaultuigley
default &amp; H
defaultarper
default (
default2006
defaultb) E
defaultff
defaultectiveness of 
defaultfi
defaultsh habitat
default 
defaultcompensation in 
defaultCanada in achieving no net loss,
default 
defaultEnvironmental
default 
defaultManagement
default 
default  
default David 
defaultTyldesley
default Associates (2012) Review of the implementation of PPS9
default David 
defaultTyldesley
default Associates (2012) Review of the implementation of PPS9
default 
defaultLawton
default 
defaultet al
default (2012) 
defaultMaking Space for Nature: A review of England’s Wildlife Sites and Ecological Network
default This should, initially, be based on the BAP lists for priority habitats and species, but will need continual revision to reflect changes in conservation status 
default Second bullet point on p.11
default As required by the Duty to Co-operate 
default