&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from APSE (WRT 031)defaultWinter defaultMaintenancedefaultIntroductiondefaultAPSE conducted an on-line survey during 
defaultsummer
default 20
default13
default. A series of questions were asked covering a range of issues of interest to those officers and councillors responsible for 
defaultwi
defaultnter maintenance
default services
default. 
default63 responses were received 
defaultfrom local authorities throughout the UK. This report identifies the key findings of the survey.   
default&#xa0;
defaultAPSE has produced a state of the market report for highways, street lighting and winter maintenance for the last 4 years and this document builds on the in
defaulttelligence within those, whilst concentrating on winter maintenance operations.
default&#xa0;
defaultContextdefault&#xa0;defaultThe 
defaultrecent 
default3 severe winters which 
defaulthave 
defaultresulted in bad weather across the whole UK certainly prompted a significant response from local authorities, central government and suppliers.  
defaultAlthough the basic winter maintenance responsibilities focussed on keeping traffic moving on gritted roads were
default largely met by local authorities, there were some significant problems along the way. There were also elements of the service which needed to be reviewed and improved. The lack of severe winter weather over the previous 10-15 years had resulted in some lo
defaultcal authorities simply being out of practice in terms of this service and had lost experience in its delivery.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is ample evidence that specific local authorities have invested in a number of areas in order to update their services but this is not the
default case in all. The Quarmby Review, alterations to guidance on spread rates and ‘Ploughing on – a review of highway resilience in 2013’ are examples of work done to inform and support the sector. Clearly historical levels of investment will differ between lo
defaultcal authorities, there will be variations in seasonal weather as well as the level of in-house experience and expertise and these factors as well as others mean some local authorities have been in a position to provide a more effective winter maintenance s
defaultervice than some others. Naturally there has been greater scope for some local authorities to invest and improve their services than others but this research reflects that fact that the review of winter maintenance services remains a perennial exercise.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe financial constraints affecting local authorities will continue into the foreseeable future and how councils react over the next few years if the weather is not as severe as it has been recently is an interesting debate. The impacts of climate change i
defaultncluding more snowfall and heavy rainfall mean it is vital that councils retain their capacity to deal with such incidents and the fact that emergency planning and response has a higher profile than ever means that these topics are taken seriously. More re
defaultasonable weather over the forthcoming winters may mean that resources are diverted away from winter services to other needy budgets leaving the service depleted when severe weather returns.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultResults from the surveydefault&#xa0;
defaultQ1.default              defaultHow has the level of your salt stodefaultcks changed over the past 4 years?defaultThis question was asked in order to highlight both the reaction of 
defaultlocal authorities
default to recent severe weather and the availability of salt 
defaulti
defaultn the supply chain. There have been issues around supply side capacity in the mar
defaultketplace for obvious reasons. Mining salt is an expensive business requiring specialised machinery and large levels of investment, it is  limited to specific geographical locations and no one is really certain when
default,
default or even if
default,
default there will be a demand for t
defaulthe product and if it does come
default,
default the demand could  vary massively. International suppliers are an option but again their supply will be affected by the weather in their 
defaultown 
defaultand other countries and the attractiveness of them as suppliers
default is
default impacted by the t
defaultime it takes to deliver the salt by ship.
defaultOf the 63 responses, 50 noted that they ha
defaultd
default increased their level of salt stocks over the past 4 years. Some of the 
defaultlocal authorities
default hold quite small stocks so although a small increase may be significant for thes
defaulte
default organisations i
defaultt has a negligible impact on the overall salt supply.  
defaultIn terms of individual 
defaultlocal authorities, 
defaultresponses to the level of salt they hold, 50 out of 63 or nearly 80%,
default said that they had increased their storage levels. A lot have made significant increases in their stocks, many more than50%, a number at 100% and one at 300%. The reasons for this include a desire to have enough salt to see them through a severe winter wi
defaultthout the need for replenishment and to be less reliant on stock management systems offered by salt suppliers. Some are looking for more regular re-stocks throughout the season. A number have built new barns or extended existing ones with the intention of 
defaultcovering their entire stock. Others have stored extra stocks in new locations rather than retain higher stocks at existing sites.  These increases have been made in response to guidance in the Quarmby Report, from the Welsh Government or SCOTS
default/
defaultSGoRR.
defaultOf th
defaulte 50 that have increased stocks, 35 have increased their stocks by more than 2,000 tonnes. Clearly the stock levels can only be increased if the supply is available and the s
defaultup
defaultpliers have obviously increased capacity in order to deliver extra salt over rec
defaultent years. This was a topic addressed the Quarmby Report and it appears that to date
default,
default suppliers have invested in order to secure improvements in the capacity delivered. 
defaultA further 11 councils retained the same level of salt stores over the period. 
defaultOnly 2 
defaultcouncils had reduced their storage levels over t
defaulth
defaulte period. Both of these councils have made changes to depots and storage arrangements resulting in less capacity.   
default&#xa0;defaultQ2.default 
defaultHave you changed the products that you stock over this time period? If so why have thdefaultey changed?defaultWith the extra snow fall and lower temperatu
defaultr
defaultes of the past few winters it would be expected that 
defaultsome local authorities
default w
defaultould
default look to new products in order to maintain a good level of service and research new products
default. This is indeed what has 
defaultbeen happening with 12 of the 63 local authorities, or 19%, who responded having changed the products that they stock. Some have changed the size of the salt they use whilst others have used new products in addition to salt and others have 
defaultextended pre wet
default operations. Some have trialled new products but decided against their use subsequently whilst others have introduced 
defaultthem extensively on the network. Some have started to use new products exclusively 
defaulton 
defaultfootways and town centres. 
defaultReasons given for some o
defaultf the changes include the cost of some of the products, reduced spread rates making some products uneconomic to use, the need to make savings by changing the products used and the Welsh Government matrix defining that there should be  re-treatment after ni
defaultne hours if sub
default-
defaultzero temperatures persist mean
defaulting
default that some products can’t be used. Another has used grit to mix with salt for grit bins and footway treatment in severe conditions.
default&#xa0;defaultQ3. Have you changed you spread rates? If so, why?default28 of the 63 responses,
default or 44%, have altered their spread rates over the last 4 years
default.  Bearing in mind updates to Chapter 13 and Appendix H of Well Maintained Highways and recommendations in the Quarmby Report, it is unsurprising that a large number of local authorities have al
defaulttered spread rates. This was given as the main reason for altering the rates with other reasons being growing confidence in the products used meaning rates could be reduced and the need to conserve salt at times of heavy snow fall. One reason for not alter
defaulting rates was that some older gritters do not have the capacity for precision adjustment.      
default&#xa0;defaultQ4. Have you changed your storage arrangements? If so why?default38 local authorities, or 60% of responses, have changed their storage arrangements. These changes include building new storage barns both in existing depots and at new depots. 
defaultThere have been a number of new builds reflecting the level of investment in th
defaulte service with some councils building more than one. The alteration and extension of existing barns is also a change noted by a number of responses and putting roofs on salt bays is another example of investment.
defaultSheeting has been more widely adopted by lo
defaultcal authorities as an alternative to barn
defaults
default.
default The sheeting maintains quality as well as reducing environmental risks. 
defaultThis enables more flexible coverage but one local authority raised the issue of health and safety concerns when plastic sheets were being pu
defaultt on and off. This concern led them to build a barn instead.
defaultOther responses include quarries now being used for strategic stock piles, sharing of Highways Agency depots and use of the South East Wales storage facility. 
default Some have split their stocks and store it at non-operational sites. 
defaultOne has 4 new stockpiles at non-operationa
defaultl sites and these piles are 
defaultshipped to operational depots as needed or for summer restock to ensure the rotation of the stock as it may be held f
defaultor 3 or 4 years before use.
defaultSome have found further space within existing depots whilst others have purchased equipment to enable them to pile salt higher so fitting more salt into barns.
defaultThe general approach 
defaultwhich has been adopted over the past 4 years by
default many local authorities 
defaultis that all salt should be covered and a number of methods are being utilised to accomplish this. 
defaultS
defaultome 
defaultlocal authorities use a mixture of sheeting, existing and new barns and sharing other organisations storage facilities. 
defaultHowever 
defaultsome still leave 100% of their salt uncovered with no plans to change this arrangement.  
default2
default5 local authorities have not changed their storage arrangements and these will no doubt have a range of storage options in place
default including leaving salt uncovered and
default open to the elements
default.
defaultQ5. Has the length of the routes you salt changed? If sodefault,default how and why?default&#xa0;default14 local authorities responded that they had changed their routes with all but two showing an increase.
default The remaining 49 have not altered the length of the route
defaults or amount of the network they salt to any significant degree. There are of course some minor additions in the form of newly adopted roads, new developments and infrastructure, changes to bus routes and road layouts and routes near schools, social service
defaults buildings and health facilities.
defaultA number of 
defaultlocal authorities
default commented on the emphasis placed on school bus routes. One rural authority noted that their policy includes a section related to the number of passengers carried on school buses. As a result
default,
default there have been slight variations to the pre-treatment routes which were dependent on the annual review of school roles each September. 
default There have been changes in terms of reprioritised routes to meet revised policies with the introduction of primary an
defaultd secondary routes enabling varied frequency of salting
default for some
default.
defaultTackling efficiency remains a major issues and route optimisation has been carried out by many local authorities to reduce or eliminate dead mileage. Others have optimised routes to bring ro
defaultutes close to new storage facilities to enable reloading if required during heavy spreads.
defaultEngagement with users is noted by two local authorities one of whom has added two short streets to the network at the request of councillors as they have been identi
defaultfied as being problematic during winter conditions whilst another noted an additional 50kms added since 2010 as result of councillor consultation o
defaultver
default routes and demands to increase lengths of bus routes routinely gritted.
defaultOne London borough commented that
default due to the extended periods of poor weather over recent years in times of severe weather minor roads are also treated.
default&#xa0;defaultQ6. defaultHave you had access to extra funding over this period?default40 responses
default, or 63%,
default said that they had no access to extra funds over the 4
default y
defaultear period equivalent
default. 18 said they did have extra funding and 2 noted that they had less funding whilst 3 replied that the question was not applicable due to PFI arrangements.
defaultA clear majority used no extra funds over this period which points to efficie
defaultnt services and good budget planning over a period of much higher demand for the service. 
defaultSome responses noted an increase in budgets over the period to cover the planned cost of new equipment and additional salt.
defaultOf those that did have access to extra fu
defaultnds, sources include council reserves (the most common source), capital bids and extra fun
defaultding available to purchase salt made available by Welsh Government. One council noted separate funding made available through the NHS to help in the prevention of sli
defaultps, trips and falls.
defaultTwo
default local authorit
defaulties
default noted that they have made a bid for extra funds under the Bellwin scheme and are awaiting the outcome.
defaultA number of local authorities provided funding from council reserves to cover the extra costs of dealing with 
defaultsevere weather.
default Few however have seen increases in revenue budgets due to the unpredictability of the weather. The revenue budget setting process is clearly difficult when future demand is unknown and the use of reserves is an obvious solution. In one resp
defaultonse, the council 
defaulthas recognised that weather related activities , mainly winter snow and ice but also wind damage and flooding, are unplanned reactive activities ( in the broad sense). As a result, any additional expenditure over and above the allocated w
defaultinter budget is covered by the 
defaultc
defaultouncil
default’
defaults central reserves as a 
defaultc
defaultorporate 
defaultr
defaultisk rather than a departmental cost pressure. This is an approach many 
defaulttake although some are not as formal in their arrangements. There is no doubt that winter maintenance is seen a
defaults an essential service and 
defaultit appears 
defaultcouncils will always provide funds to make sure that the service can be delivered effectively.     
defaultThe impression from responses is that most would have any overspend due to severe weather covered by reserves or a corporate fund rather than from elsewhere in the highways budget – again a recognition of the unpredictability of the weather. 
defaultOne response 
defaultnoted that their 
defaultoverspend ha
defaultd
default been funded from savings elsewhere within the council.
defaultSome 
defaultlocal authorities
default have a separation of budget responsibility with for example, the housing departments funding treatment of estate roads.
defaultA small number of councils 
defaultare looking to increase the base budget for the coming season but this is yet to be confirmed.
default&#xa0;defaultQ7. defaultWhat other changes have you made to your service? (e.g. default defaultpavement salting, investing in new vehicles, community engagement)defaultCorporate issues
defaultWinter service 
defaultis more and more seen as a corporate issue alongside other emergency and high risk events such as flooding and serious traffic events. Responses noted that there is continual improvement to winter service operations across all parts of the local authority 
defaultnot just the highways department.
defaultThe development of local plans for snow clearing of minor roads and non-priority footways, parishes and rural areas is a more common feature. These plans involve consultation with elected members, community councils and ot
defaulther bodies such as sheltered housing and care homes
default and other local 
defaultauthorities and public services and business where necessary. One local authority has 
defaultdeveloped a community resilience initiative, the principles of which are communities and individuals h
defaultarnessing and developing local response and expertise to help themselves during an emergency, in a way that compliments the response of the local authority and other emergency responders.
defaultService level agreement
defaults
default were introduced in one local authority in 2
default010 with all council services and community groups to ensure a council wide approach to winter and not just focused on roads.
defaultOther departments are 
defaultbecoming more 
defaultinvolved in winter maintenance with 2 examples being one highways department that purchased pl
defaultoughs and spreaders for the fleet of tractors in the leisure services department. They were and will be very useful in getting into side streets more quickly. In another local authority, pavement salting is carried out by the environmental services departm
defaultent at the request of the highways department with additional plant being allocated to them for the purpose.
defaultFleet
defaultThe purchase of new vehicles is a common theme amongst responses to the survey with a number replacing their entire fleet over the past 3 or 
default4 years 
defaultand
default one having all of its 26 vehicles less than 1 year old. Both leasing and outright purchasing are used with some local authorities employing a mix of both. Needless to say running these vehicles is an expensive exercise and dual use vehicle 
defaulta
defaultre 
defaultbecoming a far more common o
defaultccurrence
default. 
defaultIn one 
defaultlocal authority a new contract in 2011 
defaultinclude
defaultd
default provision of vehicles for the winter service whereas they were previously owned and maintained by the authority.
defaultFootways
defaultThere were quite a number of responses 
defaulthighlighting the extra work which has been undertaken on footways and pedestrian areas over the past 4 years. This has meant investment in quad
default 
defaultbikes, MPVs such as 
defaultMultihog
default or Kubota
default, tow
defaulted
default gritters, brine tanks
default, snow blowers
default and other equipment to ensure 
defaultheavily used footways are cleared. Others use mini tractors with front brushes rather than ploughs 
defaultfor footway and cycleway clearance and treatment which has massively reduced the labour requirement and the treatment times. A much greater emphasis on footw
defaultays by one London borough is a response to an increased public expectation of what should be achieved when it snows or is icy. One council introduced the treatment of off-road cycleway routes in 2012/13. Other councils have hired additional vehicles to cle
defaultar snow from car parks and hard to reach areas.
defaultEngagement
defaultEngagement with
default the 
defaultcommunity has improved over the period of the survey with responses including a number of new snow warden or ice buster schemes, both in urban and rural areas
default, far greater use o
defaultf social media such as twitter and facebook to communicate about real time issues, 
defaultroad conditions and general warnings as well as information on websites such as treatment times, information around self
default-
defaulthelp and information for driver preparedness. One lo
defaultcal authority is putting gritting vehicle tracking as a pilot 
defaulton the 
defaultweb site.
defaultTraining has been provided to 
defaultparish and town councils, partners
default,
default businesses a
defaultnd
default farmers
default in many councils as well 
defaultas issuing self
default-
defaulthelp kits to community groups.
defaultSalt is supplied
default to 
defaultsome 
defaultparish councils for them to salt public areas within the parishes and free to neighbourhood watches for use by residents in 
defaulta
default London borough. Another local authority  advertise a few weekends when 
defaultthe
default depot is open for neighbourhood watch groups o
defaultr resident associations to collect bags of salt so they can salt footways.
defaultRural area support is also a more significant issue 
defaultthan was previously the case 
defaultin a number of areas.
defaultFunding
defaultWorking with NHS funding
default,
default one local authority has been able to utilise
default the probation service to assist in gritting areas around supported housing.
defaultAnother response noted that t
defaultown and 
defaultc
defaultommunity 
defaultc
defaultouncils are encouraged to contribute towards 
defaultthe 
defaultcost of new salt bins and to carry out the associated spreading of salt.
defaultAnother 
defaultencourages their local parish councils to deliver self
default-
defaulthelp during extreme conditions through a locally developed emergency plan and a parish grant scheme through which funding is provided to pay for additional equipment and resources such as additional sa
defaultlt bins, footpath clearance equipment and the hire of equipment.   
defaultSalt bins
defaultWith regard to salt bins, a number of councils are reducing the number in their areas because they cannot guarantee that the salt is used on the highways and footway as expected 
defaultand if it is, it does not last long. Alternatively others are adding extra salt bins following requests from the public. 
defaultOne response noted the proposed deployment of 1 tonne salt bags to augment the salt bins that are already located on-street across t du
defaultring severe weather events.
defaultOne local authority will gather additional information about the usage of grit bins 
defaultin future 
defaultto better align needs with the locations 
defaultthat 
defaultthey 
defaultcurrently use.
defaultStaffing
defaultThe introduced of night shift operation in parts of 
defaultthe 
defaultcou
defaultnty are another initiative by one local
default 
defaultauthority. Carriageway nightshift gritting and snow clearing routes have been implemented during the main standby period by 
defaultanother.
defaultOthers provide winter seminars for all staff allied to regular gritter driver train
defaulting. 
defaultAnother has trained 3 new winter decision makers who will be used as verifiers for main duty controllers.
defaultNew technology
defaultOne contractor has carried out thermal mapping and upgraded the ice alert systems as well as using GPS tracking to defend claims 
defaultabout gritting not having taken place. Others have invested in additional weather stations to improve the accuracy of forecasts and so resulting in savings.
defaultAnother utilised a hire fleet of 9 cubic metre gritters
default rather than the historically utilised 6 cubic metres to establish whether time savings could be made by gritting for longer with larger capacity vehicles compared with previous years. 
defaultOther initiatives include use of VMS on carriageways and improved elec
defaulttronic record management.
defaultSustainability
defaultOne response commented on a greater focus on sustainable service delivery which resulted in around a 30% reduction in salt utilisation.
defaultPerformance NetworksdefaultPerformance Network is the largest public sector perfor
defaultmance management and benchmarking service in Europe incorporating data from local authorities across the UK. 
default APSE produces direction of travel reports which incorporate average data from all local authorities who submit. The following data covers winter m
defaultaintenance activities.
defaultPI 111 Actual days per annum where non-planned winter maintenance was carried out.default (defaultThis 
defaultPI
default 
defaulttracks
default the actual number of days per annum where non-planned winter maintenance was carried out.  
defaultIt
default refers to unpredictable events and includes snow and ice clearance
default).
defaultThe graph looks at the number of days of unplanned activity and highlights the 
defaultchanges in the scale of the service and the nature of the unpredictability of the weather
default. It clearly refle
defaultcts the fact that there was less unplanned activity in 2011-12 when conditions were as bad as in previous years. This would appear to show that prediction arrangements improved over the timescale.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultPI 117 –Actual response time for nondefault-defaultplanned defaultsalting. defaultIt shows
default the average actual response time 
default(
defaulthours
default)
default for completion of non
default-
defaultplanned pre-salting
default 
defaultcover
defaulting
default the total operation up to completion of salting.
defaultThe following PI shows that response times stayed relatively stable with a range of less than 15 
defaultminutes over 5 years with an average response time of around 3.5 hours
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultPI 107 – Annual cost of salting per km of network salteddefault. 
defaultThis 
defaultmea
defaultsures the annual cost 
defaultand
default is calculated by using the total annual service provider / client cost for the winter maintenance function figure which includes profit, winter maintenance costs, overheads, charges for the vehicles and central establishment charges.  This figure does not
default include asset rentals, debt charges and other capital charges or management and overhead costs of the service purchaser
default 
default/commissioning organisation (e.g. client unit).  The figure is then divided by the total km of the highway network which is covered by 
defaultthe salting regime.
defaultThe annual cost of salting per km increased significantly between 2007-08 and 2009-10 but subsequently dropped again. The increase coincided with a heavier demand on the service so is understandable as it included increased costs for it
defaultems such as extra salt and the driver costs of extra runs.  The costs then flattened out and decreased reflecting good practice in terms of efficiencies and reduced costs even though the weather was remained severe. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPI 112 Km length of footways where pdefaultrecautionary gritting was undertakendefaultA number of responses to the survey commented on the extra attention paid to salting footways and this is borne out by Performance Networks data. There was a dramatic increase in 2011-12 and no doubt this will be increa
defaultsed further in 2012-13. This will be as a result both of expanded routes and new equipment increasing productivity. 
default2008-09default19 kmdefault2009-10default15 kmdefault2010-11default14 kmdefault2011-12default61 kmdefault&#xa0;defaultConclusionsdefaultThis survey covered a 4 year period and as such includes a wide range of developments within local authorities. It highlights the breadth of changes which have been made to services including significant investments, the use of new materials, engagement wi
defaultth the public and discussions with councillors amongst others.  Of course some local authorities will have undertaken changes some years ago whilst others are just catching up. 
defaultWhat does emerge is a sector which perennially reviews elements of the service
default such as routes and salt stock levels and has enabled service improvement with a number of innovations and initiatives. Severe weather has forced the service to remain aware of developments by suppliers also and only 1 or 2 of the 63 responses provided det
defaultails of no changes whatsoever to the way their services are arranged. 
defaultThe development of winter plans as part of emergency planning arrangements reflect the corporate approach to the issue which inc
defaultludes
default cross departmental action, allied to work with othe
defaultr public sector providers and other local organisations. Winter maintenance is no longer a reactive response by the highways department to a one off snow incident.
defaultThe call for collaboration in public services is being acted upon by some of the local autho
defaultrities who took part in this survey. Joint arrangements to procure salt, storage of salt stocks in other organisations depots and finance provided by other public organisations are examples. 
defaultFinancial questions will continue to arise with regard to this s
defaultervice area. Snow and ice create problems in 
defaultterms of highway and footway surfaces
default which lead to deterioration in the surface, cracks and
default potholes. Therefore it is imperative that snow, ice and water are removed from the highway as quickly as possible whic
defaulth reflects the importance of the service. Nonetheless all of the snow and ice which accumulates can never be removed which means the condition of the highway and footway (and drainage systems) needs to be in top condition so that water can’t begin the proc
defaultess of deterioration. This is of course a circular argument – the roads and footways need to be well maintained to avoid the worst outcomes of snow and ice. 
defaultThis is the perennial discussion highways engineers put forward at budget time highlighting the im
defaultportance of asset management, planned maintenance and the economic value of the network. 
defaultAs noted above, it will be interesting to see how winter maintenance budgets fare over the next few years if the weather is far less severe than over the last 4 years
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default