&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from
default Transport for Greater Manchester
default (SRN 030)
default&#xa0;defaultHow will the policies set out in the Government’s ‘Action for Roads’ command paper improve the strategic defaultroad network for all road users, whilst also improving the environment?default&#xa0;defaultThe increased investment in improving and maintaining the Strategic Road Network is welcome. From a Greater Manchester perspective, the managed motorway schemes, both those programmed
default for delivery and those in the pipeline will help to alleviate existing congestion on key parts of the motorway network. This will improve journey time reliability for both commuters and businesses. The commitment to a new feasibility study looking at tran
defaults-Pennine links between Manchester and Sheffield is also welcome, particularly as it will take a multi-modal approach.
default&#xa0;
defaultLooking to the future, Greater Manchester has the potential to deliver significant economic growth in the future, with 50,000 additional
default jobs forecast in the city centre alone. There are significant growth locations very close to the motorway network, particularly the Airport City Enterprise Zone (7,000 jobs in the initial phases, potentially rising to 11,500) and the Port Salford tri-moda
defaultl freight interchange (3,800 jobs), and their success will depend on connectivity being maintained. The production of Route-based Strategies is therefore welcome, because this will allow these local growth considerations to be fed into the planning process
default for the network. The process will provide greater long-term funding certainty for major road schemes which can then inform complementary local transport investment. However plans for future investment in the strategic road network need to be linked with t
defaulthe Strategic Economic Plans of LEPs, to ensure that all investment is being targeted towards agreed economic priorities.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt should be recognised, however, that the Strategic Road Network does not operate in isolation, particularly in dense urban areas. In
default Greater Manchester the complexity of movements in these areas means that the SRN plays an important role in trips that are wholly within the urban area, in addition to carrying through traffic. The performance of SRN junctions is a key consideration in th
defaulte management of the local road network, as the impact of congestion at these junctions can be widespread. In major urban areas there is therefore a need for a ‘total network’ approach to managing and investing in the road network as a whole, for example ma
defaultnaging and addressing pinch points in partnership.
default&#xa0;
defaultAdditional investment in roads will often provide additional capacity and the additional traffic will result in environmental impacts in terms of air quality, carbon emissions, noise and biodiversity. Whi
defaultle the design of schemes can reduce some of these impacts (e.g. use of low noise surfacing), others can only be mitigated through cleaner engines or reduced traffic. Taking a ‘total network’ approach to investment would allow mitigating measures such as im
defaultproved public transport, active travel or smarter choices measures to be developed alongside SRN schemes, thereby reducing their overall environmental impact. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn Greater Manchester, a number of protocols between the Combined Authority and the Highways Ag
defaultency have been put in place to improve joint working. Building on these, t
defaulthe 2012 City Deal identified the appetite from Government to work proactively with Greater Manchester on highways reform, both in terms of providing freedoms and flexibilities around
default regulations that have hampered efficient collaboration and in the consideration of future models that would allow the Combined Authority greater influence over Highways Agency priorities and budgets. DfT see this as a critical element in establishing a fu
defaultture approach to highways that is efficient and most relevant to local economic priorities, which they would ultimately look to encourage elsewhere in the country. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHow does the Government’s policy for roads link with planning for other transport modes?default&#xa0;
defaultPolicies to improve the road network and to provide additional capacity on strategic routes need to be integrated with policies for other modes. Although additional capacity on strategic routes, improved traffic management and low emission vehicles can to 
defaultsome extent reduce congestion and the environmental impacts of road travel, there is still a need to reduce the proportion of single occupancy car trips, particularly at peak times.  Encouraging more people to walk, cycle or use public transport at peak ti
defaultmes can improve the reliability of the road network and reduce journey times for commuters and businesses. In major urban areas this requires significant investment in public transport, walking and cycling in order to provide an attractive alternative to c
defaultar travel and give people a choice in how they travel. There is a particular need to increase the capacity of the rail network to carry freight, and to maximise the use of inland waterways, so that more HGVs can be taken off the road network. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPlanning fo
defaultr investment in the strategic road network therefore needs to be co-ordinated with both investment in the rail network and in local transport in the major urban areas. In transferring the Highways Agency a strategic highways 
defaultcompany, the Government should 
defaultinclude within its remit a responsibility to work with local highways authorities and Network Rail to manage demand on the strategic network. 
default&#xa0;defaultHow reliable is the Government’s forecast for growth in demand for the strategic road network? How should the Godefaultvernment deal with uncertainty in its forecast?default&#xa0;
defaultThe forecast for growth in demand for the strategic road network is based on national growth factors and needs to be reviewed regularly to ensure that it reflects changes in the economy and trends in car use
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever national forecasts may not reflect growth in demand at the regional or sub-regional level, particularly in the major urban areas which have the greatest potential for future economic development. The identification of these local factors throug
defaulth the Route-based Strategies process should bring significant improvements in forecasting, but the information will need to be kept under review and regularly updated. We would also encourage national agencies to collaborate with local transport authoritie
defaults to develop the most efficient and cost effective means of data collection, which may increasingly involve the use of wider digital information where regulations and legislation on data protect permit this to take place.
default&#xa0;defaultHow can we improve the defaultreliability and efficiency of travel on the strategic road network? What impact will new technology have?default&#xa0;
defaultIn major urban areas there would be great advantage in introducing single Traffic Control Centres, covering both the SRN and the local road network. 
defaultThis would enable the active monitoring of operational capacity, road activity works, events and incidents on strategic traffic routes across the conurbation and the dynamic management of interventions to maximise efficiency and minimise road traffic casua
defaultlties and delays to people and goods. It will also enable better co-ordination of data collection and traffic management plans (including plans to help meet carbon reduction targets) across local authority boundaries and between different agencies and prov
defaultide a single point of contact for liaison with the Regional Traffic Control Centres and Police, Fire and Rescue Services. It could also provide better information to highway network users to help them make informed choices about their journey.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat mechandefaultisms are there for Government to increase investment in strategic roads and attract new investors? Are there good examples from other countries that should be applied in the UK?default&#xa0;
defaultWe have no definitive recommendations to make in this regard. However, as cha
defaultllenges remain to optimise the use of the highway system, and to manage the consequent environmental impact, there may be scope to consider differential charging regimes on the system, alongside the need to improve alternative methods of travel particularl
defaulty for shorter trips on the strategic network. No doubt, any such consideration would entail a wider consideration of the way in which motoring is currently taxed in the UK.
default&#xa0;defaultHow should the Highways Agency be reformed to make it ‘the world’s leading highwaydefault operator’? What roles should Government and the private sector play to ensure better management of the strategic road network?default&#xa0;
defaultThe role of Government should be both to provide certainty of funding and a clear, consistent direction on major projects. The 
defaultadvent of the RBS approach offers the scope to secure greater levels of certainty in this regard by defining a clear strategic pipeline of activities over a five year period. However, whilst all projects in an investment pipeline should be kept under revie
defaultw, Government will need to ensure that the transition from one spending period to another does not cause a ‘stop-start’ approach and uncertainty for investors where development is dependent on infrastructure provision. In addition, the RBS process must als
defaulto ensure that longer-term planning horizons for major investment programmes in the network are fully accommodated, so as to ensure that the development of the network is not undertaken with only the short-term medium in consideration.
default&#xa0;
defaultFinally, we would al
defaultso highlight the importance of the Agency establishing new models of working with local transport authorities and Local Enterprise Partnerships at the strategic level. As noted above, the Strategic Road Network in Greater Manchester cannot act in isolation
default if it is to support the economic prosperity of the city region. Further reform of the Highways Agency is encouraged so as to ensure that it is fully aligned with a model of working that enables optimal shared management arrangements across strategic and l
defaultocal highway networks in the interests of local and national growth objectives.
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default              
default2
default              
default&#xa0;
default