1
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten edefaultvidence fromdefault Suffolk County Council (SRN 033)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default1.default              defaultIntroductiondefault&#xa0;default1.1 
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council is th
defaulte Highway Authority for 
defaultSuffolk
default and liaises regularly with the Highways Agency, particularly to discuss issues relating to the A14, the main trunk road between the 
defaultport
default of 
defaultFelixstowe
default and the 
defaultMidlands
default and a key route for road hauliers. The county council believes that investment in the A
default14 urgently required 
defaultand is vital to the future economic prosperity of the county.
default&#xa0;default2.default              defaultHow will the policies set out in the Government’s “Action for Roads” command paper improve the strategic road network for all road users, whilst also improving the defaultenvironment?default&#xa0;default2.1
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council welcomes the Department of Transport’s statements that it will be investing £15 billion on adding additional capacity to the 
defaultUK
default’s strategic road network by 2021. 
defaultIt also welcomes the 
defaultDfT’s
default intention to spend £12 bil
defaultlion on maintenance and £6 billion on resurfacing. It also welcomes the ambition to bring the 
defaultUK
default’s trunk road network up to clearly defined national standards.
default&#xa0;
default2.2
default              
defaultHowever, while the council recognises that these are signif
defaulticant amounts of funding, they s
defaulthould
default not be allocated 
defaultat the expense of funds like 
defaultthe Local Sustainable Transport Fund and the Cycle Safety Fund. Both of these funds enable local transport authorities to find ways of ensuring that the addition of capacity to the trunk road network will
default have minimal negative effects on local communities 
defaultin the form of community severance, noise, light
default,
default and air pollution.
default 
defaultThey also help councils encourage use of modes of travel other than the private car which are safe and have significant public health b
defaultenefits
default as well as reducing intra-urban traffic congestion
default.
default 
defaultFor example, 
defaultSuffolk County Council is using £1.5 million of the 
defaultDfT’
defaults
default Cycle Safety Fund
default to construct a pedestrian and 
defaultcycle bridge
default across the A14 to 
defaultreduce community 
defaultseverance
default and increase walking and cycling within Bury St. Edmunds
default.
default 
defaultIt is these funding streams that ensure the 
defaultUK
default trunk road network is appropriatel
defaulty pedestrian and cyclist-friendly
default and they must not be stopped or reduced
default at the expense of investment that just
default ben
defaultefit
defaults
default motorists.
default&#xa0;
default3.default              defaultHow does the Government’s policy for roads link with planning for other transport modes?default&#xa0;default3.1
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council welcomes the additional capital and revenue investment in the 
defaultUK
default’s trunk road network. However, the council feels that
default this must be embarked upon as part of a coherent inter-urban UK transport strategy for all modes with the aim of using transport as a tool to help facilitate economic growth, but also to ensure the UK meets its environmental obligations and improves the q
defaultuality
default of life for local communities. 
defaultThe council feels that a crucial part of this is to pr
defaultovide 
defaulthigh quality rail services between key urb
defaultan centres and to provide
default high quality walk and 
defaultcycle
default facilities within all urban centres. It also believes the gove
defaultrnment should increase the volume of
default freight moving on to rail. 
defaultThese measures will help free up 
defaultcapacity on the strategic road network for the moto
defaultrists that have no choice but to use it
default. 
default&#xa0;default4.default              defaultHow reliable is the Government’s forecast for growth in demanddefault for the strategic road network? How should the Government deal with uncertainty in its forecast?default&#xa0;default4.1
default              
defaultThe Authors of this paper state that, because of improvements in technology and a reduction of insurance costs (in real terms), the cost of motoring will
default fall in real terms over the next 30 years
default. Consequently, 
defaultmotor traffic, particularly on the strategic network
default, will continue to increase
default as 
defaultstrong 
defaulteconomic growth returns. The Council agrees that there are many uncertainties when forecasting traffic growt
defaulth over the longer term (e.g. the way population age composition might mean a change in where different groups of people will live). The government can deal with the many uncertainties by preparing, monitoring and updating a multi-modal transport strategy w
defaultith focused and relevant objectives, rather than relying on the “predict and provide” approach of past governments.
default&#xa0;
default4.2
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council also supports the investment of an extra £500 million between 2015 and 2021 in infrastructure to enable greater use of electric vehicles. However, while these vehicles are affective for shorter intra-urban journeys, they might not be
default as suitable for longer-distance inter-urban journeys. The Council believes that this could add further uncertainty to the department’s forecasts. Also, technological advancements within the motor car industry should not be used as a reason to reduce 
defaultsuppo
defaultrt for longer distance travel by sustainable modes of transport. 
default&#xa0;default5.default              defaultHow can we improve the reliability and efficiency of travel on the strategic road network? What impact will new technology have?default&#xa0;default5.1
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council welcomes the 
defaultDfT’s
default 
defaultintentions to invest in the different technological solutions mentioned in this document. However, it also feels that the reliability and efficiency of the strategic road network can be improved through The Highways Agency being more proactive than in the 
defaultpast in its 
defaultengagement with local Highway Authorities and their local stakeholders
default. For example, Suffolk County Council’s own 
defaultHighways team has found it difficult in the recent past to share with the Highways Agency its proposals to improve signage at or i
defaultn the vicinity of junctions connecting local roads with the A14 in the county.
default&#xa0;
default5.2
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council feels that greater use of technology and more proactive liaison between The Highways Agency and local Constabularies would enable quicker and more 
defaulteffective responses to accidents and faster clear-up times
default which would reduce the length of delays
default.
default&#xa0;default6.default              defaultWhat mechanisms are there for Government to increase investment in strategic roads and attract new investors? Are there good examples from other countries that could be applied in the defaultUKdefault?default&#xa0;
default6.1
default              
defaultSuffolk County Council welcomes the aim of increasing investmen
defaultt in the strategic network and welcomes the intention to attract investment from sources other than the public sector at a time of public expenditure constraint. It agrees that the move towards 5-year road investment strategies 
defaultwill give the Highways Agenc
defaulty, its suppliers
default,
default and contractors the financial certainty to commit to innovative ways of working 
defaulttogether 
defaultthat could generate operational efficiency savings.
default&#xa0;
default6.2
default              
defaultLooking at the exampl
defaultes of other countries and how their governments
default have attracted investment in their strategic road networks, the council realises that some form of direct road user charge,
default shadow toll,
default concession agreement, 
defaultand/
defaultor availability payment is part of this. However, it feels that direct road user charging sh
defaultould only be implemented as part of a clear
default, well thought out,
default national trunk road network investment strategy and must apply to all parts of the 
defaultUK
default network so as not to put businesses in one region at a competitive disadvantage to those in another.
default There 
defaultmust also be a full cost benefit analysis undertaken before any of the above arrangements are introduced.
default 
default&#xa0;
default6.3
default              
defaultThe Council believes that a direct road user charge is the most effective and fair way to manage the demand placed on the s
defaulttrategic road network
default, but it mu
defaultst be implemented throughout the 
defaultUK
default on a 
defaultuniversal 
defaultpay-as-you-use basis.
default All routes containing a direct road user charge must also have 
defaultuntolled
default alternative routes that are suitable for Heavy Goods Vehicles, as many haulage companies have a
default policy of not paying road user charges
default.
default&#xa0;
default6.4
default              
defaultShould direct road-user charging be introduced across the strategic road network, how will the 
defaultDfT
default ensure equitable treatment for all road users in terms of charging policy? What mechanisms will be put in place
default to ensure that prices and price increases are fair and justified when there might be di
defaultfferent financing and contractual
default agreements across the network? For example, arrangements for the M6 toll road might be different to those of the Dartford Crossing, wh
defaultich might affect the price charged to the user over time.
default&#xa0;
default6.5
default              
defaultIt is partly for this reason that Suffolk County Council suggests that the performance of the new Strategic Highways Company be monitored by a full economic regulator with a similar remit to th
defaulte Office for R
defaultail Regu
defaultlation over Network Rail
default.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default7.default              defaultHow should the Highways Agency be reformeddefault&#xa0;defaultto make it “the world’s leading highway operator”? What roles should Government and the private sector play to ensure better management of the strategic road defaultnetwork?default&#xa0;default7.1
default              
defaultShould the Highways Agency be given greater operational independence from government, it needs to be properly regulated and held to account by a full economic regulator. 
defaultThis would be particularly important should the organisation adopt one o
defaultf the operating models mentioned on pages 71-73 of the Action for Roads paper
default in the long term
default. 
defaultThis organisation must 
defaulthave the appr
defaultopriate powers to ensure that the company
default consults sufficiently with local authorities and local businesses before embarking
default on any investment project. For example, Suffolk County Council feels, along with other stakeholders, that the 
defaultrecent consultation over the A14 Cambridge – Huntingdon investment package 
defaultcould have been more effective. 
defaultThe tone of the 
defaultTechnical Review and O
defaultptions document
default, published in September 2013
default, the very short consultation time, and the lack of engagement with representatives in Suffolk, made it appear that The Highways Agency and the 
defaultDfT
default considered the problem and possible solution to be unique to Cambridgeshire and gave scant regard to 
defaultthe vie
defaultws of 
defaultstrategic road users from outside the county. This is in spite of the considerable financial impact a road user charge would have
default on them. 
default&#xa0;
default7.2
default              
defaultIf the Strategic Highways Company were regulated by an organisation 
defaultwith 
defaultsimilar 
defaultpowers 
defaultto the Office for
default Rail Regulation, it would at least have to show that it published market studies and business plans and gave an appropriate time for stakeholders to read and respond to them, either in writing or within a workshop envir
defaultonment.
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default Highways Agency (2013), 
defaultA14 Cambridge – Huntingdon Improvement Scheme: Technical Review of Options
default, (accessed online), 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/243999/a14-technical-review-of-options.pdf
default 
default