&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultDo you think the EU should be providing funding to Member States to tackle youth unemployment? Does EU action respect Member States’ power in the area of social and employment affairs? default&#xa0;
defaultAs a result of the economic downturn, youth unemployment i
defaults at a historically high level across the European Union, albeit there are significant variations between Member States with levels much higher in Mediterranean countries, relative to Northern European. In terms of its own situation, the UK is positioned s
defaultomewhere in between the two groups of Member States. It should also be noted that prior to the financial / Eurozone
default crisis, the EU had been attempting to reduce its relatively higher level of youth unemployment compared to its then main competitors of Japa
defaultn and North America.
default In its 1994 White Paper ‘European Social Policy’ the European Commission noted that: 
default‘EU-wide youth unemployment stands at over 20%, as against 13% in the US and 5% in Japan’. Since then the EU 
defaulthas made various attempts to address the 
defaultproblem, albeit with limited success given the flexible governance arrangements often used, and the limited amount of (financial) resources that have been available.  
default&#xa0;
defaultWhen tracing the subject of youth in EU treaties, we find the first official reference 
defaultin the 1957 EEC-Treaty. Article 50 of this treaty provides that: Member States shall, within the framework of a joint programme, encourage the exchange of young workers. With the Treaty of Maastricht (1992), this provision was complemented with Article 126
default TEC, which deals with youth and education and the participation of young people in democratic life in Europe. Although this seems to cover a broad scope, the competence to deal with the subject is limited to the encouraging of the cooperation between the 
defaultMember States and, if necessary, by supporting and supplementing their action, while fully respecting the responsibility of the Member States for the content of teaching and the organisation of education systems and their cultural and linguistic diversity.
default This has remained unchanged during the revisions of Amsterdam (1997; article 149 TEC); Nice (2000; article 149 TEC) and Lisbon (2009; article 165 TFEU). 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is in this formal context that EU Youth Policy developed during the 1990s when it 
defaultgained politica
defaultl momentum at the transnational level. 
defaultThe launching of the European Employment Strategy
default (EES)
default in 1997 requested the Member States to reduce youth unemployment. Member States were required to develop employment friendly strategies with the overall aim of e
defaultnsuring ‘every unemployed young person is [to be offered] a new start before reaching six months of unemployment, in the form of training, retraining, work practice, a job or other employability measure’.
default Member States were also required to ease the trans
defaultition from school to work, particularly for young people from poor backgrounds. As such, they were required to improve the quality of their education systems, and where appropriate, develop apprenticeship training.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultSince the EES, the EU has attempted t
defaulto resolve the issue of youth unemployment with intergovernmental agreements
default such as the EU’s Lisbon Strategy (2000), the Laeken Declaration (2001), the European Commission’s 2001 White Paper ‘a new impetus for European Youth’, and the revised Lisbon Strate
defaultgy of 2005. As part of the latter agreement, the European Council adopted the European Youth Pact focusing on three priority areas: employment integration and social advancement; education, training and mobility; and the reconciliation of work and family l
defaultife.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn 2009 the Council adopted a resolution on a renewed framework for European cooperation in the youth field (2010-2018).
default The resolution defines one overarching objective, namely ‘to enable all young women and men to make the best of their potential’
default to be achieved via two sub-objectives: 1) more and equal opportunities for young people in education and in the labour market; and 2) active citizenship, social inclusion and solidarity of young people. The objectives are underpinned by eight fields of ac
defaulttion in which initiatives should be undertaken: education and training; employment and entrepreneurship; health and well being; participation; voluntary activities; social inclusion; youth and the world; and creativity and culture.
default Such issues surrounding 
defaultthe EU’s young have also been incorporated into Europe 2020, the EU’s latest economic reform strategy. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn June
default 2013
default, European leaders agreed to ring-fence 8bn euros to combat youth unemployment. The funds will form the basis of a Youth Guarantee that 
defaultaims to provide a job, training or apprenticeship to young pe
defaultople within four months of them
default leaving school, full-time education or becoming unemployed. 
defaultSuch funds are designed to complement activities within the Member States and are for those regions wor
defaultst affected by the problem. This recent initiative builds on EU activity in the field that has deve
defaultloped over the last two decades and I believe that the EU should be acting in this policy field. 
defaultGiven the seriousness of 
defaultyouth unemployment, it seems logica
defaultl that the EU should offer some financial support to aid Member States. The EU is often criticised for wasting taxpayers’ money in areas such as the Common Agricultural Policy, but financial support in the area of youth unemployment indicates that the EU c
defaultan, and does
default, act
default in policy areas that 
defaultare 
defaulthighly 
defaultsalient with the electorate and represent serious and immediate problems. An added benefit of attempting to address common problems face by the Member States at EU level, as demonstrated by the research con
defaultducted on new modes of governance in the EU over the last 15 years, is that
default EU activity provides a framework in which different 
defaultactors from
default across the 
defaultMember States, as well as the broader set of EU policy actors
default, enables the 
defaultexchange of best practice and 
defaultpeer review of policies. This gives national actors a greater insight into how
default a
default policy fields operate in other Member States
default,
default with the possibility of adopting and adapting
default successful policy
default such ideas to their national
default 
defaultcontext if desired. 
default   
default     
default&#xa0;
defaultGiven 
defaultthe limited Treaty basis of the EU in the field,
default as well as the broader fields of employment and 
defaultsocial inclusion,
default such activity respects the authority and autonomy of Member State sovereignty in the area, is legally non-binding, and therefore has no conse
defaultquences should a Member State
default decide not 
defaultto engage with EU developments. 
defaultThe European Commission therefore cannot refer a Member State to the ECJ for non-c
defaultompliance with this initiative, and the funds are designed to complement activities and national leve
defaultl. They are not designed replace national initiatives or to provide the Member States with a one-size-fits-all policy approach. It should also be noted that that relative to the problem, the amount of funds available is actually quite small.  
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultHow do you think that the EU can best ‘add value’ to Member States’ efforts to tackle unemployment? default&#xa0;
defaultAs mentioned above, EU 
defaultinvolvement that
default offers financial support but is also 
defaultvoluntary
default enables actors from the Member States to engage with those beyond t
defaultheir national borders. This often helps with the spreading of best practice
default and the search to find solutions to a common set of problems. Member States who are struggling with a particular issue can find out how another Member State has successfully resolv
defaulted the problem. On a problem as pressing as youth unemployment, the more individuals and organisations that can be involved to come up with new ideas, the more likely governments will find successful solutions quickly. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAs part of the EU’s 2010 Youth on t
defaulthe Move initiative, the EU’s website on the matter provides a range of tools to help young people work, train and study abroad. A problem with Youth on the Move is that the overall aim is only relevant to a small number of people. The vast majority of the 
defaultEU’s young want to stay within their own Member State for a whole host of reasons (friends, family, but also poor language skills which would mean that jobs offered in another Member States are likely to be below an individuals skillset). The Youth Guarant
defaultee scheme is therefore an attempt 
defaultto tackle the issue for those individuals who do not wish to
default migrate to other EU Member States for work. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultA problem with the initiative is 
defaultth
defaultat the amount of money 
defaultbeing spent may be insufficient and furthermore, it may not necessarily be in the right area. 
defaultYouth unemployment is a complex issue and it has been a problem since before the crisis. For the pre-crisis youth unemployed, issues surrounding poor skills 
defaultand e
defaultducation and training are highly salient and current EU initiatives may help with this problem. But 
defaultt
defaulthe recent spike in youth unemployment is a consequence of the recession within the Eurozone and thereby a lack of demand within the economy.
default For young peop
defaultle who find themselves unemployed post 2008, they are less likely to have poor skills and require retraining. It is therefore questionable how targeted and successful current EU initiatives are. In this respect EU initiatives to boost youth employment coul
defaultd be more targeted to supporting entrepreneurship, helping start-ups with the funding of incubators and centres that specifically focus on young people with new ideas and business initiatives. This would have a much greater long-term impact on the problem 
defaultthan simply focusing on education and training. As the current situation demonstrates, having a highly skilled and educated workforce, as the EU does, is no guarantee
default of
default employment.       
default&#xa0;
default18 October 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultOJ [1998] C30/1.
default 
defaultOJ [1998] C30/1.
default OJ [2009] C311/1.
default