&#xa0;
defaultSupplementary written evidence from the Federation of Small Businessesdefault&#xa0;
default16
default October 2013
default&#xa0;
defaultI very much appreciated the opportunity to provide oral evidence on the Consumer Rights Bill on behalf of the Federation of Small Businesses last week.
default&#xa0;
defaultI had wanted to follow up with you regarding 
defaultan issue 
defaultI raised which wasn’t pursued as a line of questioning, perhaps be
defaultcause qui
defaultt
defaulte
default understandably
default,
default the focus of the Committee was striking a balance between consumers and small businesses rather than small businesses as consumers.
default&#xa0;
defaultTo elaborate, during the evidence session I explained briefly that the FSB is 
defaultcarrying out 
defaulta significant piece of work on small businesses as consumers because micro-businesses in particular, are very often consumers in exactly the same way as individual
defaults, 
defaultbut they lack the same level of regulatory
default protections
default in consumer legislation.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur research project is underway and being led by Professor Amelia Fletcher from the University of East Anglia, the former chief economist from the OFT, looking at how small businesses behave as consumers and how legislators and regulators can help protect them from unfair practice.  Whilst predominately focussing on the regulated markets, such as energy and telecoms, the project 
defaultwill address questions such as: 
defaultTo what extent are suppliers required to provide information to small businesses in an easily accessible form about the products available to them? To what extent is the information provided to small businesses required 
defaultnot 
defaultto be mis
defaultleading? To what extent are small businesses
default protected from aggressive or otherwise i
defaultnappropriate sales practices? 
defaultTo what extent are small businesses protected from unfair contract terms?
default default&#xa0;
defaultThe project team is
default currently looking into the role the 
defaultConsumer Rights Bill 
defaultcould play in helping the UK’s smallest businesses gain adequate consumer protection an
defaultd we would therefore welcome the Committee
default to look into this further.  We have approached 
defaultthe Department 
defaultasking why they have chosen no
defaultt to class small and micro businesses 
defaultas consumers but
default have not 
defaultyet 
defaultreceived a satisfactory explanation.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe FSB believes consideration should be given as to whether small or at least micro businesses, should be classed as consumerdefaultsdefault for the purpose of the Bill to ensure the UK’s smallest businesses enjoy the same level of protection as consumers will when they are defaultusingdefault goods and services.  default&#xa0;defaultWe appreciate this is a complex and legally technical
default area but we believe this is an area that should be given though
defaultt
default to.
default I would welcome the opportunity to discuss this with you further. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultMike CherrydefaultNational Policy Chairman, Federation of Small Businessesdefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default