BRC02
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten submission from Dr Robert Judson defaultBackgrounddefaultFollowing watching the TV coverage of the Committee looking into Par
defaultt P Registration of electrician
defaults and the associated organisation I felt it necessary to produce a report to correct what I believe is miss information given to the Committee by Part P Accreditation Organisation and Trade Associations who have a vested interest in it continuing as it currently is.
default&#xa0;defaultPersonal Qualifications to Speak on this SubjectdefaultI started my working life as an apprentice electrician in 1966 and qualified as an electrician when I was 20 at in 1970. I studied at night school to gain all of the certificates possible in my trade including Technicians Certificate, Higher National Certificate and a BSc in Electrical Engineering. 
defaultI have been responsible for the design and construction major electrical installations in many landmark building in the UK as well as numerous domestic properties. 
defaultI progressed in my career and have been the Managing Director of several electrical engineering companies and eventually was the MD of one of the UK's major Building Services Company employing circa 550 people/sub contactors with a turnover of £50m. 
defaultThroughout my career I continued to practice as an electrician to as they say "keep my hand in" and undertook a number of domestic installations personally.
defaultI also continued with my part time education to gain a Master of Business Administration Degree and a Doctorate in Business Administration. I therefore have some knowledge of managing organisations.
defaultIn 2001 I gave up my job as the MD of a large contracting company in London and moved to Cumbria and started my own small electrical contracting business where I have undertaken a range of industrial, commercial and domestic installation. 
defaultWhen Part P was introduced I applied to one of the Accreditation Organisations and became Part P registered with them. When it became necessary I attended college to get a 17th Edition Regulation Certificate to enable me to continue to be Part P accredited. Recently I changed my Part P Accreditation from the original organisation to a different one purely because of cost. 
defaultI am a Chartered Engineer and am a Member of the Institution of Engineering and Technology (Formerly the IEE) and Fellow of the Chartered Institute of Building Services Engineers 
defaultBefore moving to the North West I was also a Member of the M&amp;E Industry Joint Major Contractors Group Committee in London.
defaultTo summarise 
default&#xa0;
defaultOn the basis of the above I believe that I am better qualified to comment on the current Part P Accreditation System than most and certainly better qualified than those from the Accreditation Organisations and Trade Association who have given evidence to your Committee most of whom I imagine have no electrical training, qualifications or experience.
defaultEvidence/StatementdefaultI listened to the Committee questioning of the various accreditation bodies on Television and I have to share with you my view that everything they have said was compete rubbish and was geared to justifying their organisations commercial existence and involvement in the process. Not once in the process did any one of them make any statement that suggested to me that they had any interest in the safety of the consumers. 
defaultIt is my personal opinion that the introduction of the Part P Accreditation requirement has done absolutely nothing to improve electrical safety and may actually give credibility to some people who are not competent to undertake electrical installation work at all. What it clearly has done it has done is impose unnecessary costs on contractors who have passed this onto the consumers without providing any benefit.
defaultThe approximate cost of Accreditation per electrician are as follows:-
defaultPurchase of a test meter circa £1500 say 10 year life
default£150 pa
defaultCost of annual calibration
defaultcirca 
default£50
defaultCost of PI Insurance
defaultcirca 
default£500
defaultCost of Part P Accreditation
defaultcirca 
default£400
defaultTotal Annual Cost
defaultc
defaultirca
default 
default£1100 pa
default&#xa0;
defaultThroughout my working life I have probably taken more examinations than most people and recently having taken the 17th Edition GOLA (Global on line assessment), which is one of the corner stones of getting Part P Accreditation. I can say with absolute certainty that is the easiest examination that I have ever taken and that if 
defaultyou as a Committee were to take the 17 Edition GOLA exam then I believe that a number of you would actually pass. The reason for this is that the examination is a multi guess approach however the 3 choices leave no doubt as to what is probably the right answer. 
defaultCan I suggest that the Committee look at the percentage pass rate for this examination.
defaultAs far as the accreditation process is concerned it is my opinion that it is almost impossible to fail as long as you have a document to say that you have served an apprenticeship, paid the money to the Accreditation Organisation, paid an insurance company for £2m of Public Liability Insurance, bought a test meter and had it calibrated and bought a set of the current regulations and electricians guide.
defaultCan I suggest that the Committee investigate how many people fail the Accreditation Process.
defaultHaving spent the considerable sums of money you then get a visit from the inspector from the Accreditation Organisation.
defaultAt this point I feel that it is necessary to put domestic wiring in context. 
defaultAs an electrician one could be expected to be able to carry out a wide range of installations from wiring systems in say a Nuclear Powers Station at the top end of the scale to Domestic Wiring at the other end. In 1966 when I started work my first year was spent in a Pre Apprentice Training School and we were required to spend 4 weeks on a number of  different trades before selecting which apprenticeship to take. During the 4 weeks on the electrical trade we were expected to wire up a ring main, a lighting circuit with a 2 way switch, do basic calculations for cable sizing and carry out basic testing. (This was in 4 weeks as a 15 year old). Since 1966 very little has changed to domestic wiring systems other than the colour of the insulation has changed twice to standardise with Europe, the metrication of the cable sizes to comply with SI units, the addition of an earth bonding lead to the metal box and the addition of PVC earth sleeving on the bare earth conductor. 
defaultI hope this illustrates that the technical knowledge and expertise required for domestic wiring is at the bottom end of the skills that any electrician would have and it is not complicated. Domestic wiring is as simple as it gets!
defaultGiven the above it is unlikely that any electrician, unless they were completely incompetent, is going to fail the site inspection. Can I suggest that the Committee investigate how many actually do fail the site inspection.
defaultOnce you are Part P Accredited the notification process is an absolute joke. It requires a Part P Accredited electrician to go on line and fill in a form with the name and address of the customer, a description of the installation, and the name and address of the Building Regulation Authority. There is no requirement to give any more information other than any reference number that the electrician may have given a particular job. The Accrediting organisation then send out a notice to the customer to say that their installation has been tested (the customer should already 
defaultknow this because the electrician should have given them a copy of the test certificate) and a similar notice to the relevant Building Control Authority. I suspect that these documents are actually automatically computer generated from what the Part P electrician types in. To put it in context. My wife has a holiday business which rents out holiday apartments. I do the electrical work in these apartments whenever it is required. We work from the same office with desks side by side. When I complete an installation I test it and give her a copy of the inspection and test sheets and keep a copy in my records. I then go on line and record the fact that I have completed an installation with the Accreditation Organisation ( I have to pay for this each time) they, or possibly their computer system, then send notice to my wife at the next desk by post telling her that I have completed the installation and tested and commissioned it. They don't send her any test data because they just don't have it. How has that added anything to the process?
defaultI am sure that because I am 62 years old and we live in a Society that is ruled by the young who know it all you will think that I am just an old fool. But I assure you that I have a detailed knowledge of what is going on that is very different to what you have been told by those with a commercial vested interest in the current system continuing. I have no commercial interest in sending this evidence/report whatsoever my only interest is in exposing the ridiculous situation that exists.
defaultI would like to suggest that what is actually required is a simple registration system for electricians and a law which says that to undertake electrical work you have to be a registered electrician. This is what most western countries have.
defaultAll that is required is a central register held by the Government (Not outsourced to some private commercial organisation) which the public can access. The register would be in two parts. Part 1 names of registered electricians and Part 2 the names of registered electrical contractors.
defaultAny member of the public could look up in Part 1 the name of the person claiming to be an electrician and they would be able to see the following information:-
defaultAny member of the public could also look up the name of any electrical contracting company to see the following information. (Note the Accreditation Organisations are heavily into "Brand Extension" and are trying to force Electricians to register with their various contractor endorsement schemes at further expense)
defaultOnly bona fid
defaulte
default registered electricians and companies would be on the list and those with expired qualifications would be advised that they required to undertake training or be struck off.
defaultIf you are not on the list you would not be allowed to undertake electrical installation work.
defaultIt would also allow contracting companies taking on electricians to see if applicants were registered. (The JIB do this to a certain extent although it is not mandatory to be JIB registered)
defaultAll registered electricians would get an annual site visit from an electrical inspector attached to the Building Regulation department who would check on the quality of their work and compliance with regulations. If they were found to be lacking they could be struck off
defaultWhen a registered electrician completed an electrical installation they themselves  would send a notice to the relevant Building Control Office on a standard form. The Building Control Officer could look up on the Register to see that the electrician was indeed registered as such and could if he so chose inspect the installation himself.
defaultThis system is simple and accessible to the general public. It removes any doubt from the general public's mind about what work they can do themselves as the answer would be none.
defaultThis would improve the safety of users which the current shambles does not
defaultIn conclusion I would be pleased to travel to London at my own expense and discuss my report with the Committee and be questioned on my comments. In support of my comments I could provide documentary evidence to show how incompetent at least one of the accrediting organisations actually is which casts doubt on their ability to be involved in this process.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default