&#xa0;
defaultWritten submission from AEW Electrical (Edinburgh) default&#xa0;
defaultI have just watched your committee meeting with regards to the above. As an approved electrical with 38 years experience I have never been so dismayed to w
defaultatch in my view a bunch of self-
defaultinterested 
defaultScheme operators who have systematically ran our industry into the ground.
defaultI live in Scotland so do not have to deal with Part P thank God but I am part of a nationwide forum for electricians and the consensus is that the Scheme providers are out of contro
defaultl where they run and dictate to the industry and give nothing in return. Interviewing them on a single scheme was quite frankly irritating as they are not interested.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs for a single register I am and have been registered with the Scottish Joint Industry 
defaultBoard of SJIB the English version is the JIB so there is a single registration system that actually works plus let me explain.
defaultIn Scotland I can submit electrical certification “By Enquiry” or in other words I submit the following:-
default&#xa0;
defaultYet if I am a Scheme member I just have to submit my certification with my Scheme number only problem is this in my view
default is abused because it is not policed by the Scheme Providers and it is only when you probe and ask for calibration certificates and qualifications you find there is problems.
defaultIn England a Electrician has to register with a Scheme so when he or she complete
defaults certification for the local planning at a cost of £1.90p yet if an electrician who is not scheme registered want to submit certification then its £190.00p
default.
default So in my view this does not comply with the European Free Trade Act and discriminates against a le
defaultgally qualified insured electrician.
defaultAs for Part P well what you were not told was that the Schemes to get more revenue run 6 week courses to train individuals to be domestic electricians good grief it took me 4 years to get to Electrician grade than a fur
defaultther 2 to get to Approved status 6 years in total. As for the Scheme policing the system what a joke in my view it is a conflict of interests or turkeys voting for Christmas they just ain
default’
defaultt going to kick anyone out and lose their revenue stream as for char
defaultity status great no shareholders just more money for pay rises pensions and bonuses.
defaultIn my view our industry is being flooded by 6 week Scheme trained and registered “electricians” and the public are aware of this. The Scheme providers are even poaching ea
defaultch others members to get their numbers up never mind standards.
defaultMy business is run by referral because in my view the public have no faith in the Scheme providers so please feel free to check my reviews on my 
defaultFreeindex
default site 
defaultwww.aewelectrical.freeindex.co.uk
default or on my main site 
defaultwww.aew-electrical.co.uk
default 
defaultits
default not hard and as for a single body its already exists via the SJIB of JIB and to add they could run a 
defaultregister where Joe public could see if an individual is competent qualified and insured for a fraction of the confusing Scheme Providers.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default