&#xa0;
defaultWritten submission from That’s Electric! Ltd default&#xa0;
defaultI have just watched the televised recording of last week’s meeting and cannot quite make up my mind as to the best description for it – ‘car crash TV’ or ‘Four desperadoes trying to wrestle control of
default the gravy train before it departs them forever’.
defaultWhilst I am largely in favour of this government’s aims to reduce bureaucracy and encourage healthy competition, if ever there was a clear example of where the State needs to step in to control a situation 
defaultbefore it becomes too desperate between competing factions then this is it.
defaultPlease allow me a few brief moments of your time to outline my thoughts.
defaultIt is this latter reference to international work which I hold most dear – at one time, 
defaultthe United Kingdom was very much a technical leader and historically had developed protocols and methods which have been adopted world-wide with an electrical safety record to rival – if not better – any other nation. Sadly, today I could not be sure of su
defaultch a claim.
defaultShould their choice not work out, then they can always re-enter the trade at a later da
defaultte simply by signing away their credit rating to a variety of fast-track training short-cuts, payment of fees to the schemes above and so on.
defaultFor example, the NICEIC, which was once a ‘champion of standards’ have the following minimum academic entry criteria – to hold City and Guilds exam
default 2382, otherwise known as ‘17
defaultth
default editions’. Again, to put this into context, this is an online, interactive, multiple choice exam which is open book and consists of 40 questions. In short, you have roughly three and a half minutes to look up the right answe
defaultr and my dog could pass it. The schemes then seek to ‘safeguard’ this entry criteria by using the process of annual inspection.
defaultAs someone whose own business has been subject to this same annual inspection for the last few years let me leave you in no doub
defaultt whatsoever that it is a farce. As the appointed ‘Qualified Supervisor’ for my own business I think I was on site for less than four minutes with our assessor last time.
default&#xa0;
defaultSo, to sum up, why will it be that these various organisations will never see a consensus? Because put simply to do so will show their 
defaultown inadequacies and failings, highlight the staggering amount of corporate greed (however it gets wrapped up in ‘not for profit’ this, that or the other) and frankly show them up as being useless to either the public, government or trade. I would venture 
defaultso far as to suggest that some of the things you heard last week are most charitably put as distortions of the real truth and have no reality on the streets.
defaultI would please ask you to imagine a United Kingdom where there were competing organisations for su
defaultch things as the General Medical Council, Bar Council, DVLA…and so on. We would quickly descend into a place I don’t think either or us, nor the common man, would wish for.
defaultAccepting that the government has not timetabled further discussion on the wider aspects of Part P since the last consultation, I would respectfully suggest that time be called on this fiasco; they’ve had almost a decade of squabbling over the pie and achi
defaulteved nothing except a lowering of standards. In place should be a Government endorsed compulsory register, much along the lines of GasSafe or any number of 
defaultother countries with similar schemes, with entry requirement dictated by a committee of the IET (it 
defaultis after all, their own regulations aka BS7671 which we work to), with a monetary system fairly balanced against true running costs and suitably policed by law (else what point is there?).
defaultOtherwise, some of the horrors I have personally witnessed whilst o
defaultverseas may well start to make an appearance on a street near us, and I fear may already have arrived. In fact, I know they have – I’ve seen them already. Who would you prefer to work in your own home and keep your family safe? A rhetorical question I know
default.
defaultI would, of course, be more than happy to place my time and opinion at your future disposal should you feel it beneficial, and can only hope that I am not alone in formally voicing my concerns.
defaultSeptember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default