&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Scott Electrotechnical Assessment Link Ltd defaultRe: Building Regulations applying to electrical installations and repairs in dwellingsdefaultI am an Electrician and registered Electrical Engineer, with in excess of 36 years 
defaultexperience, including the assessment of the technical standard of electrical contractors and electrical installation work; I am very aware of the hazards of unsafe installation practices. I have been moved by dismay to write to you after watching the prese
defaultntation to Communities and Local Government Select Committee on the 02 September 2013.
defaultThe presentation by the Electrical Safety Council and other interested parties associated to the current voluntary electrical registration schemes reflected their object
defaultive of self survival; and nothing else.
defaultWhilst I do not believe the consumer; or the electrical contracting industry would benefit from a statutory register; the current arrangement and the Electrical Safety Council has achieved very little to raise consum
defaulter safety awareness or provided recognised guidance for the selection of a competent electrical installer. The competitive market between registration bodies also creates many negative aspects and wasting of revenue; the two registers of domestic installer
defaults is one result of this wasted energy.
defaultThe majority of consumers are not aware of the existence of either of the registers, or any of the registration schemes; let alone the Electrical Safety Council; further despite over 50 years of operation few members 
defaultof the public have heard of the NICEIC; the same is now sadly true of NAPIT, ELECSA et al. This is a result of poor marketing ability, complacency and lack of vision within all of the organisations.
defaultThe consequential in-fighting that is now evolving betwee
defaultn registration bodies is also negative to the industry and significantly detracts from the objective of consumer safety.
defaultAny register of electricians must cover the whole of the industry, including commercial and industrial providers, since the smaller con
defaultsumer's knowledge in these specialist fields are no different to that of the domestic consumer; and the risk to the public is no less. It is acknowledged that places of work are within the scope of the Electricity at work regulations (SI 635 1989); however
default this is a reactive, rather that a proactive approach to the issue.
defaultThere is also another specific field which lacks control; that is not sufficiently addressed; that of inspecting and testing of existing installations; where many electricians lack the r
defaultequisite skills and experience to evaluate and report on work that has been completed by a third party. We are currently in a ludicrous position where domestic installers are acknowledged as competent to verify third party installations; whereas experience
defaultd inspectors are excluded from the opportunity to offer this service; because they choose not to be registered as domestic installers.
defaultThe development of a single unified voluntary register of competent organisations and individuals is a simple task; it co
defaultuld be easily achieved at minimal cost; if it is provided by a new body; that is independent of all scheme providers including the Electrical Safety Council. Funding for both the new register; its administration and all promotion of the register should be 
defaultavailable from the Electrical Safety Council's resources.
defaultAll competent persons would be eligible for inclusion in the register; and would maintain their registration subject to satisfactory assessment and revue of complaints. Complaints would be administe
defaultred by the independent registration body; but investigated by the individual scheme providers.
defaultAn additional function of the registration body would be to monitor the performance of each assessment scheme provider; thereby ensuring consistency of their ass
defaultessment standards; this is currently a significant issue; with disparity of standards viewed sceptically by registered contractors.
defaultIf the register is recognised by both the industry and the greater public it will operate successfully without the need for 
defaultstatutory regulation.
defaultThe existing competitive market should be maintained for the provision of assessment; but with a single regulated fee; competition would be for added value from the scheme provider.
defaultLittle can be gained from comparison to existing reg
defaultulated schemes, such as Gas Safe; as this is a derivative of CORGI; which was introduced with high public profile following the Ronan Point incident; there have been no such comparable instances of electrical installation failure. Although a single scheme 
defaultwould unify standards of assessment and little consumer benefit is achieved from the current competitive assessment market.
defaultCurrently the Electrical Safety Council can claim little success in raising public awareness; the vast majority of the public have n
defaultot heard of them let alone any campaign or survey they have undertaken. There is a need for targeted promotion by an organisation that knows both the public perception and the electrical contracting industry, the ESC is not that organisation; but should be
default the source of funding for the promotion which can be very cost effectively provided. The industry also needs a clear definition of what can be regarded as appropriate qualifications for recognition of competency; try asking the scheme providers to define 
defaulta qualified electrician; taking account of historic recognition of electricians.
defaultThe Government does not need to resolve issues; such as providing a searchable directory; this information is already available from all scheme providers and just requires col
defaultlation and promotion. The existing complaint process's can be retained within each scheme; and simply routed to the scheme provider from the central register administrator. This will provide a single initial point of contact and closure for the consumer.
defaultT
defaulthe over-riding question must be; what has been achieved to date and will any benefit be gained from a further two years of the current provisions administered by 
defaultthe self appointed; self interested and impotent scheme providers; for the benefit of those at
default the Electrical Safety Council.
defaultReference to on-line consumer campaigns is a smoke screen; many viewers of the site will be from outside of the United Kingdom; and many more will be as a result of redirection. I am active within the electrical industry and
default have not seen any of the purported ESC consumer promotions.
defaultHaving seen that the Committee share my frustration; I ask that they act to urge the Government to end this unsuccessful attempt at consumer protection; which to date has only resulted in financi
defaultal reward to self appointed regulators.
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default