BRC13
defaultSubmission from Mr H BloomfielddefaultCan I just add my support and full agreement to Dr Robert Judson’s earlier submission, as he has spelled out my own thoughts so very eloquently?
defaultI am a recently retired engineer, who served his time and went to college for the necessary qualifications – a full six years of learning, before I was let loose. I then eventually moved onto installing and running some extremely large schemes, involving some very massive currents and systems of control, some of which were close to the £10m mark.
defaultMy experience in the electrical industry I would describe as extensive as it is possible to be, ranging from domestic wiring to electronics and microprocessors, robotics to PLC’s.
defaultWhilst winding down towards retirement, I took a job well below my usual level, but still in the industry I once loved. I had a 16
defaultth
default Edition and was offered a 17
defaultth
default Edition upgrade. A colleague had accepted the upgrade course, took it and related what took place during the one day course. It was basically a sham. One engineer whom I would describe as too dangerous to let loose near any sort of work, struggled with the answers. The instructor sat down beside him and fed him the correct answers. That company is now sending out that guy as a supposedly qualified engineer. With such going on, I refused to take part in such a sham of a course and complained to the City &amp; Guilds about the course. Short courses are great for those who already have the background understanding, but such short courses are also letting complete numpties loose in the world. 
defaultYesterday evening I had a young relative supposedly Part P qualified helping me diagnose an issue on some car wiring. He was about to connect a meter set on the ohms range onto the vehicle, to check continuity, with the car’s battery still connected, so I stopped him. He could not understand at all why I had stopped him, just did not understand even the basics, yet was Part P qualified.    
default It seems to me that many of those taking Part P qualifications often lack even the basic knowledge needed to deal with anything at all technical. Yet here I am for the most part unable, due to Part P, to legally do work in my own home and the idea is that I have to call a much less experienced person in to do it – what would have been called at one time a ‘simple House Basher’.
defaultI have very grave concerns as to where the electrical industry is going, with all of this sub-division for an entirely profit based motives. The JIB was at one time all the proof needed of being qualified to do the job. 
defaultThe extra costs involved to the house owner as a result of Part P, will be even more of a  temptation to get an unqualified person in, or to have a go themselves.  
default&#xa0;
default