&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitteddefault by defaultUK Association for Science and Discovery Centres (CLC0069)defaultI write in response to the discussion during the oral evidence session on 9 October 2013 within the 
defaultinquiry 
default‘Climate: Public understanding and policy implications’. My points relate to the Members’ discussion around the need for trusted mechanisms (a porta
defaultl) to engage the public with climate science, and if such a mechanism existed. I believe it does, and I outline below the nature of this 
defaulttrusted portal which currently engages 20 million people every year in both cities and rural locations across the UK.
default-
default---------------------------------------------------------
defaultThe 
defaultUK Association for Science and Discovery Centres
default brings together over 60 of the UK’s 
defaultmajor 
defaultscience engagement organisations, including science and disc
defaultovery centres, national 
defaultscience 
defaultmuseums, en
defaultvironment centres 
defaultand 
defaultlearned societies. Together, these trusted centres 
defaultattract over 20
default million 
defaultvisitors each year who 
defaulttake time to explore and delve into science in a hands-on, intriguing and personal way. 
defaultThe Association’s c
defaultentres span all regions and c
defaultountries of the UK and reach into a huge number
default of ‘hard to reach’ communities. They 
defaultcollectively
default 
defaultengage over 2
default million
default 
defaultschool students from a range of socio-economic 
defaultbackgrounds
default,
default who take part in science workshops, 
defaultdiscussions, 
defaultlabs and 
defaultscience 
defaultevents.
defaultTh
defaulte subjects
default covered by the science and discovery centres 
defaultrange from climate 
defaultscience to
default 
defaultspace science
default and 
defaultfrom 
defaultnanoscience to brain science. However, it is clear to all 
defaultprofessionals working within 
defaultthe 
defaultfield of science engagement
default that there is no greater 
defaultimmediate need, nor indeed any greater challenge,
default than to engage people effectively
default and widely
default on the subject of climate science - and to do this very soon.
defaultThe UK Association for Science and Discovery Centres, with its defaultvibrant and trusted defaultnational infrastdefaultructure and thousands of defaultprofessional defaultscience engagementdefault specialists defaultcould defaultplay a major role in helping people in all parts of the UK to engage with the latest climate science, and get people talking about the UK’s policy responsedefault. 
defaultThese 
defaultlively 
defaultscience 
defaultce
defaultntres 
defaultalready operate 
defaultsuccessfully 
defaultand sustainably 
defaultin this 
defaultengagement 
defaultsphere; they are embedded in their local communities with excellent 
defaultrelationships with university science, industrial partners
default, schools, teachers and families.
default Indeed, the work they curr
defaultently do is 
defaultvalued highly enough by
default 
defaultfamilies, schools, teachers and the wider public 
defaultthat in most 
defaultcities
default, 
defaultpeople
default 
defaultpay to 
defaultvisit
default, 
defaultand visit repeatedly.
default 
defaultScience and Discovery Centres 
defaultare experts in 
defaultboth 
defaultengagement, 
defaultand in science. 
defaultIndeed, it
default is their raison d’être and their charitable mission. They are staffed by talented creative individuals with 
defaultconsiderable 
defaultexpertise in all areas of 
defaultthe 
defaultscience
defaults
default, 
default as well as
default 
defaultcommunications
default, design, 
defaulteducation
default, marketing, the arts and 
defaultmore.
default 
defaultThe majority of 
defaultASDC member centres (from At-Bristol to the Eden Project, and from W5 in Belfast to the Science Museum in London) have already invested significantly in programmes and exhibitions to engage their publics with climate science. These range from lively evenin
defaultg events
default 
defaultfor adults, workshops for schools, family shows and 
defaultcarbon 
defaultcompetitions right through to full hands-on climate exhibitions and formal dialogue events 
defaultin partnership with
default ASDC and Sciencewise. They include content in all areas of climate science fr
defaultom earth observation to the latest low carbon innovations
default and engineering
default. 
defaultThe following gives some examples of the poten
defaulttial
default science centres 
defaulthave 
defaultto reach people in all parts of the UK and what could be achieved if these were focussed on climate science.
default  Glasgow Science Centre attracts 
default280,000 people each year of whom 90,000 (32%) are school students brought by their teachers
default 
defaultto take part in targeted curriculum-linked science workshops and activities
default. Thinktank, Birmingham’s Science Centre attracts 
default260,0
default00 people
default annually
default, 
defaultof whom 
default78,000 
defaultare 
defaultschool students
default taking part in science workshops and discussions. Family and 
defaultleisure visitors
default at Thinktank take part
default in 
defaultscience shows, sleepovers, story-telling, 
defaultmeet the scientist 
defaultand 
defaultlab
default-based
default workshops
default. This patter
defaultn is replicated up and down the country
default - 385,000 people visit ASDC member centres every week of the year.
defaultThe key to what science and discovery centres 
defaultdo
default is to start where their public is, and to take them on a journey rather than to impose upon them wha
defaultt someone feels they should know. Science centres 
defaultoffer 
defaultfamilies, 
defaultadults
default and school children
default unusual 
defaultand exciting 
defaultopportunities 
defaultto explore, discover, question
default, test and experiment
default on the world around them. 
defaultThe aim is not simply to fill people with facts, b
defaultut to take them on a journey to spark their curiosity
default and
default to encourage them to continue asking questions about
default the
default world
default 
defaultlong after they leave our centres. 
defaultIt is clear 
defaultthat 
defaultthe network of UK science and discovery centres and museums could mobilise in a 
defaultnational way to get people across the UK interested and involved in climate science
default and to start asking questions about what we collectively should be doing about it
default. Indeed ASDC already runs national programmes in this way, for example the current ‘Explor
defaulte Your Universe’ Programme in partnership with the Science and Technologies 
defaultFacilities C
defaultouncil (STFC). Ho
defaultwever to make a national climate change 
defaultprogramme 
defaulthighly 
defaulteffective it needs to be carefully 
defaultmore carefully 
defaultconstructed
default than any other
default. 
defaultClimate change 
defaultcreates a specific issue in that most people in the UK have considered it at some level, and many have an entrenched position on it. That makes the issues of trust key, and that is in part why I write. Science and discovery centres and museums are trusted 
defaultvoices and environments. They are not arms of Government, they are local, and are always on the side of the visitors. 
defaultOur approach would be to 
defaultwork with the fields of behavioural psychology, health and social psychology and environmental psychology all 
defaultof
default 
defaultwho
defaultm
default have expertise 
defaultthat would shape what we did. In addition we would want to bring together all we collectively and internationally know about behaviour change and 
defaultgame theory, cognitive dissonance and delayed gratification
default, all of which have a bearing 
defaulton 
defaultwhy people do and do not 
defaultchoose
default to change
default. Much too is to be learned from all the 
defaultacademic and grey literature 
default(formal published non-academic reports) 
defaulton
default 
defaultbehaviour change in 
defaultseat belts, drink-driving, 
defaultsmoking, pensions and healthy 
defaultliving. All of 
defaultthis ne
defaulteds to be applied to any future discussions on climate change.
default Likewise, 
defaultwe would see it important for people to explore
default the process of science and how 
defaultwe get to a point where most scientists agree
default, as well as 
defaultopening up the 
defaultthe mistaken assumption that 
defaultmo
defaultst of us have that 
defaulthumans act rationally
default.
defaultWe would 
defaultalso 
defaultwant to look at innovative and experimental programmes
default and what 
defaulthas worked
default. F
defaultor example ‘global conversations’ run by W5, the 
defaultBelfast science centre
default, wh
defaultere 
defaultpupils and teachers from Northern Ireland an
defaultd Republic of Ireland formed cluster groups with students in Ghana and Ethiopia and shared information on their views on climate change and sustainability 
defaultand how it affects them
default.
default We would also look at the myriad of successful examples from Bristol, a European leader in sustainability and green innovation and communications. Indeed Bristol is the first UK city to win the title of ‘Green Capital of Europe’ which it will host in 2015
default because of its leadership in this area
default and because it has very high city wide rates of indicators such as cycling behaviours.
defaultAs a note, The 
defaultUK Association for Science and Discovery Centres
default 
defaultalso sees it as vital that people in all parts of the UK have open access to the very latest climate information and evidence. 
defaultSir Mark Walport, Chief Science Advisor 
defaultis therefore visiting a number of UK science and discovery centres 
defaultto 
defaultshare the latest
default cl
defaultimate science evidence and policy with
default 
defaultthe public and school students
default so they can hear it first hand.
default 
defaultAs a nation
default and as a global society we have some 
defaultmajor
default challenges ahead. 
defaultAddressing these challenges will require both scientific entrepreneurship and fu
defaultndamental societal engagement and change
default and we feel we can help in this
default. 
defaultWe need our young people t
defaulto be confident to experiment and innovate
default 
defaultwith science, technology and engineering and
default 
defaultto become trail-blazers 
defaultfor a lower carbon future. 
defaultWe need our adult 
defaultpopulation to
default better understand the sciences, encouraging them to examine evidence and
default lobby for the policy changes needed for a 
defaultbright 
defaultlow carbon future.
default 
defaultWe need to 
defaulthelp people to find the 
default delight of 
defaultexploring
default the world around us
default 
defaultwhilst
default 
defaultreducing our foot
defaultprint on it
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDr Penny Fidler defaultis the CEO of The UK Association for Science and Discovery Centres. 
defaultShe
default has a PhD in neuroscience from Cambridge University and has fourteen years experience working in the field of science engagement, including setting up a millennium science centre, running an Exhibitions and Neuroscience Consultancy and speaking in Parliam
defaultent on the importance of informal science learning. She has also founded and directed many national strategic science engagement projects.
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default As well as the 
defaultUK’s Science and D
defaultiscovery centres, ASDC membership includes 
defaultall science-related 
defaultNational Museums who are funded by DCMS 
defaultto enable free public entry
default.
default