&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by E.J. Matthews [FBB0003]default&#xa0;
defaultWithout doubt the BBC carries a higher expectation for delivery of truth and accuracy in its reporting news than any other media outlets. Unlike other broadcasters it also carries an obligation to inform educate and entertain which makes it far more than 
defaulta purveyor of single subject matter and by description tied to a hard taskmaster.
defaultHowever and from the perspective of a person who grew up through the transitional phase of sole audio visual entity on the whole the BBC has achieved this objective with meri
defaultt; at least in my opinion until say the past twenty years
default,
default during which it has drifted. It has drifted downwards and in a way in which Lord Reith would
default succumb to apoplexy should he be alive today.
defaultThe BBC has rested on the laurels won during WW2 and such 
defaultinnovative programmes carried on the less pop-resistant topics of Science, Philosophy innovative Drama and Satiric expose. Programmes such as TW3, Spitting Image, The Ascent of Man, Tomorrows World even live entertainment such as 
defaultOld Grey 
defaultWhistle Test
default or M
defaultorecambe and Wise
default to name but two,
default laid
default bench marks which I fear have sadly been over written by the convenience of extensive pre-recording and editing which may well serve to satisfy ‘professional’ standard of approval but serve to disconnect with
default reality
default.
defaultThe News service and perhaps the most important service element of the BBC brief certainly carries the PC Multicultural agenda in to every living-room despite the fact that the nation has never been exposed to any meaningful debate at any stage, whe
defaultther 
defaultthis is deemed desir
defaultable or not by the wider population as a whole. This pro-European agenda coupled with the diminished role of our own Parliament’s autonomy seems more akin to Orwell’s 1984
default and the BBC seemingly simply trots out the required supine messa
defaultge without regard to balance of public opinion.
defaultThe cult of celebrity news-readers is also a cause for concern as it now follows the familiar routine of ritual exchanges of personal pleasantries for simply doing what they are supposed to be doing with deta
defaultched professionalism. Even the weather reporters are in on the act virtually bypassing the fact that they are addressing the entire nation and not just their pals behind the news desk.
defaultThis matter however irritating is surpassed by the arrogance of the BBC
default to remunerate its self-serving participants at rates grossly in excess of the average wage of the licence payers on whom they depend for their existence. 
defaultThe BBC needs to revisit its original and contextual remit from the 1930s as though it was being reb
defaultorn and only then will it realise how far it has come from its conceptual and ethical roots – but I won’t be holding my breath in expectation.
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default