&#xa0;
default Supplementary written evidence from defaultRtdefault Hon Chris Grayling MP, Lord Chancellor and Secretary of State for Justice, Ministry of Justice, defaultfollowing defaultthe defaultevidence defaultsession on default16default defaultOctoberdefault 2013default&#xa0;defaultProtocol 36 processdefaultWhile giving evidence to 
defaultthe Justice
default Committee on 16 October 2013, I committed to providing you 
defaultwith some additional information relating to Council Framework Decision 2008/947/JHA on the application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments and probation decisions 
defaultwith a view to the supervision of probation measures and alternative sanctions (the 
defaultProbation FD). For ease of reference, this measure is number 88 on the list of measures 
defaultwithin the scope of the 2014 decision that we placed in the House library and further 
defaultinformation on it can be found in Command Paper 8671.
defaultAs I explained while giving evidence, one of the key issues the Government had in mind 
defaultwhen considering which measures to rejoin
default 
defaultwas that those measures will permanently come 
defaultunder the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) once we rejoin them. As you 
defaultknow, many of the pre-Lisbon measures were political compromises in order to secure unanimity and as a result can be broadly drafted. If the UK Parliament enacted similarly 
defaultbroad legislation UK courts would have to interpret that legislation were it ambiguous or 
defaultunclear. Of course in the case of 
defaultEU defaultlegislation, it would ultimately be the ECJ which would 
defaultdecide how a measure should be interpreted. The key issue is what happens if the 
defaultinterpretation of that legislation by the ECJ results in unwelcome outcomes for the UK which 
defaultthe Government wants to address. If it was a UK law and a UK court then the UK Parliament 
defaultcould respond. However, with an EU law and an ECJ judgment the - UK cannot act 
defaultunilaterally to amend the law.
defaultWith this in mind, the Government assessed each measure and considered whether on 
defaultbalance the UK should seek to rejoin it. In the case of the Probation FD, it has only been implemented by a limited number of Member States and we are not aware of it ever having 
defaultbeen used to date. As such, at this stage it is very difficult to make an assessment as to how 
defaultthe measure might or might not work.
defaultWhen I made this point while giving evidence I touched upon the measure's vagueness in
default 
defaultrelation to deportation and committed to provide you with further detail on that point in
default 
defaultparticular. Article 5 of the measure relates to the criteria for forwarding on a judgment and,
default 
defaultwhere applicable, a probation decision. In our view it is entirely unclear in relation to its
default a
defaultpplication to persons who have been returned to another Member State as a consequence 
defaultof being deported and who did not consent to 
defaultbe 
defaultreturned but who are now lawfully and 
defaultordinarily residing there. My view is that the better reading of this FD is that this does not 
defaultapply to deportees, as the provision implies that return should be a choice, but it is 
defaultabsolutely not clear whether other Member States, the Commission and ultimately the ECJ 
defaultwould agree.
defaultWhether or not it applies to deportees and in what circumstances could of course have potentially substantial consequences in terms of the Probation FD's usefulness, and impact 
defaulton the UK. If it doesn't apply to deportees then its usefulness (as a public protection 
defaultmeasure allowing states to supervise incoming deportees who may present a risk) is 
defaultobviously significantly curtailed. If it does apply to deportees then, although this may affect a 
defaultrelatively small group of offenders, we are unclear as to what happens in the event an 
defaultindividual is deported, the probation decision or alternative sanction is transferred, and 
defaultthere is a subsequent breach. In particular, Member States may make a declaration that they will 
defaultnot deal with breach locally, under certain circumstances, but will transfer jurisdiction back to the issuing Member State (and we already know from declarations made by some Member 
defaultStates that some States will do this). As a result, if the person has already been deported, 
defaultand the receiving Member. State then wishes to return jurisdiction on breach, I am not clear what the status of that deportation would be. Alternatively, the transferred order may be 
defaultunenforceable, thereby entirely undermining the purpose of the FD. These are very 
defaultimportant questions and until we have clearer answers it is not a measure that I consider the 
defaultUK should seek to rejoin.
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default