&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Christopher GilldefaultWHO  CARES  ?defaultSo,
default what are the principles upon which 
defaulttraditional English common law i
defaults founded ?
default 
defaultFirstly, that until proven otherwise,
default every person is presumed
default innocent. 
defaultThe 
defaultpresumption ofdefault  
defaultinnocencedefault defaulti
defaults the 
defaultvery keystone of the British criminal justice system.
defaultS
defaultecondly, except under the circumstances prescribed
default in the latter day Prevention of Terrorism Act, nobody may have their liberty infringed
default without being charged in open court within 24 
defaulthours of arrest. Crucially the ‘charge’ has to be backed by 
defaultprima facie
default evidence.
default Even when the suspect is thought to have committed murder
default,
default detention without charge may 
defaultonly be extended, with the permission of magistrates, to a maximum of 96 hours
default. This fundamental principle is enshrined in the law of 
defaultHabeas Corpusdefault 
defaultwhich Archbishop Desmond Tutu once described as being
default 
default”such an incredible part of freedom”.
defaultThirdly,
default the right to
default 
defaulttrial by jurydefault,default 
defaultoriginating
default 
defaultin 
defaultM
defaultagna Carta
default,
default forms part of the very bedrock of the British criminal justice system. It
defaults significance
default is that it ensures that the defendant can insist that he 
defaultor she 
defaultis effectively ‘tried’ by his 
defaultor her 
defaultpeers -
default 
default‘
default12 good men and true
default’
default -
default 
defaultdrawn at random from amongst the general public
default and demonstrably 
defaulti
defaultndependent of 
default‘the powers that be’
default who
default might otherwise act in an authoritarian and arbitrary fashion.
defaultFourthly, until recently that is, it was always held that once a defendant had been acqu
defaultitted it was unlawful to charge
default 
defaultthat person 
defaultagain 
defaultwith the same offence. 
defaultDouble jdefaulteopardydefault was something that British subjects have heretofore never had to worry about. The view was taken that it was totally unacceptable that a potentially innocent person should forever live under the threat of being dragged through the courts 
defaultagain and again in the circumstances in which the prosecution had failed to establish guilt in the first case
default.
default 
defaultAn unwritten principle of 
defaultthe 
defaultBritish 
defaultcriminal justice system was that it was better that 10 guilty men went free than that one innocent person be hanged
default.
defaultFifthly, in order t
defaulto avoid the possibility of
default 
defaultdefendant
defaults
default being condemned on the strength of thei
defaultr own testimony the law embraces
default 
defaultthe
default right to silencedefault.
defaultSixthly
default, the 
defaultinadmissibility of hearsaydefault defaultavoids the pos
defaultsibility of
default defendant
defaults
default being found guilty on the basis of say-so evidence from absent ‘witnesses’.
defaultSeventhly, the 
defaultwithholding of previous convictionsdefault defaultensures that the hearing of cases brought to court are not prejudiced by the defendant’s previous record
default.
defaultEighthly, trials 
defaultin absentiadefault,default 
defaultin
default other words trials in the absence of the defendant
default,
default have no place in the British criminal justice system
default.
defaultFinally, we have
default 
defaultreporting restrictionsdefault so that whilst matters are 
defaultsub judice
default 
defaultPress reporting is limited so as not to prejudice a fair trial.
defaultAs can be seen from the foregoing
default,
default the British system of criminal justice has bent over backwards to 
defaultprotect and defend the individual from State inspired coercion. It has been the individual’s sure protection against false accusation, arbitrary arrest and wrongful imprisonment.
defaultAs we face a future i
defaultn which the harmonisation of
default criminal justice systems within the European Union looms ever closer it is instructive to note that there is no equivalent of the law of 
defaultHabeas Corpus
default 
defaultin continental Europe, trial by jury is a little known concept and they most certainly don’t start from a position of presumed innocence !
defaultAs for all the other defences against State coercion that we British enjoy
default,
default in the event of an acquittal, 
defaultthe continental systems 
defaultallow the prosecution to appeal for the defendant to be tried again; a defendant
default’
defaults refusal to answer questions is regarded as an admission of guilt; reported or ‘hearsay’ evidence is frequently used to obtain convictions; a defendant’s record, including prosecutions pending, may be read out at the hearing
default; the defendant may be tried without being present in court or, as recently confirmed, without the defendant even being aware of the hearing and, 
defaultnot l
defaulteast, the Press are free to nam
defaulte names and express opinions both before a
defaultnd during the course of 
defaulta trial.
defaultAt a time when we stand in extreme
default danger of having the European Court of J
defaultustice made superior to our own national institutions
default t
defaulthose of us who were born free, for that is the very nature of our British inheritance, would do well to contemplate the 
defaultcommendable 
defaultwords of Admiral Blake, the chief founder of England’s naval supremacy in the 17
defaultth
default century
default,
default 
defaultthat “I will have the whole world know that none but an Englishman shall chastise an Englishman”
default.
defaultThe English common law is what has made us a free people and has kept us a free people – the prospect of surrendering it in favour of criminal justice systems whose 
defaultraison d’etre
default 
defaultis to ensure the supremacy of the State rather than the freedom of the individual is really too awful to contemplate but, be warned and be 
defaultvery 
defaultafraid, that
default is the direction in which your Government is currently taking you.
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default