&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Mr Gary PowelldefaultThe CLG Committee has called for submissions for its further review of the work and performance of the Local Government Ombudsman. This submission is in response to that invitation. 
defaultI 
defaultam the founder and former director of Local Government Ombudsman Watch, and 
defaultpreviously submitted evidence to the CLG Committee in 2012
default:
default 
defaulthttp://www.public
defaultations.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmcomloc/writev/lgo/lgo04.htm
default 
defaultand to the ODPM Committee in 2005
default:
defaulthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200405/cmse
defaultlect/cmodpm/458/458.pdf
defaultGiven the overwhelming evidence of institutional pro-council bias on the part of the office of the Local Government Ombudsman – evidence that some other private citizens and I worked very h
defaultard to publicise since
default Local Government 
defaultOmbudsman Watch
default was set up
default in 2003
default – the fact that it is now 2013 and the same LGO spin-doctoring and whitewashing is as rife as ever, raises the question of why the CLG Committee, and its predecessor, the ODPM Committee, have allowed this to happen, and a
defaultre continuing to allow this to happen. 
defaultI have experienced at first hand the effect
default that 
defaultthe entrenched and repeatedly whitewashed maladministration committed by the Local Government Ombudsman has on the emotional and basic existential well
default-
defaultbeing of very 
defaultvulnerable people. I experienced this bo
defaultth as a result of supporting a
default family in 200
default3 that
default had experienced maladministration from their local council, and also from the hundreds of people who e-mailed me when I was director of Local Government Ombudsman Wa
defaulttch, including people
default who had clearly suffered grave injustice and
default who were considering suicide because of their desperation.
defaultIt is truly appalling
default that such a warped, callous, dishonest and self-serving institution as the Local Government Ombudsman can be
default allowed to continue to function with impunity
default in this modern
default, 
defaultdemocratic state, 
defaultand 
defaultindeed, 
defaultapparently with political collusion. It is an i
defaultnstitution 
defaultthat is a disgrace to 
defaultour nation and a betrayal of the citizens for whom it is a last resort for justice
default.
default It is not only a waste of taxpayers’ money: it is a parasite that takes from its host with a 
defaulthollow 
defaultpromise to d
defaulto some good, whilst disguising its truly
default pathological function. Furthermore, it has now become patently clear that the physicians who 
defaulthave the 
defaultmeans to cure this pathology lack the 
defaultwillingness and 
defaultcommitment to do so. 
defaultThe time 
defaultis 
defaultnow 
defaultover 
defaultfor 
defaultrepeating
default 
defaultthe same 
defaultdetailed argument
defaults
default 
defaultand
default compelling
default evidence
default that have been presented to a
default select committee 
defaultthat goes through the motions but is fundament
defaultally slack, unresponsive and indifferent – 
defaulta 
defaultprocess that now spans
default the
default ten years since LGO Watch was founded.
default The CLG Committee has a wealth of 
defaultoverwhelming
default evidence at its disposal that proves just what a travesty the Local Government Ombudsman is, and there is no point in repeating oneself or 
defaultspending 
defaultfurther 
defaulthours rebutting the usual taxpayer-funded whitewashing and subterfuge
default from the LGO,
default when it is clea
defaultrly a completely futile exercise. 
defaultThe final straw is the so-called independent “
defaultExternal Evaluation
default 
defaultof
default 
defaultthe Local Government Ombudsman in England
default,”
default published 
defaultthis year. It is anything but an “independent” evaluation. The very fact that the evaluation was c
defaultommissioned by the LGO, rather than by the CLG
default 
defaultC
defaultommittee
default, meant
default that the LGO were able to select people who they knew wo
defaultuld be sympathetic to their situation
default: 
default"The following independent report on the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO) was commissioned by 
defaultthe LGO in response to a recommendation of the Select Committee on Communities and Local Government in 2012." (p4)
default&#xa0;
defaultThe LGO’s manipulative behaviour with regard to previous Ipsos-MORI Customer Satisfaction Surveys, detailed in my previous submissions, come
defaults immediately to mind here.
defaultWith regard to
default the composition of the investigating Team, we are told:
default"The Team was Chaired by Richard Thomas CBE, Chairman of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council and former Information Commissioner.1 The other mem
defaultbers of the Team were Jim Martin, the current Scottish Public Services Ombudsman and former Police Complaints Commissioner for Scotland;2 and Dr Richard Kirkham,3 an academic from the University of Sheffield with previous research experience of ombudsman s
defaultchemes." (P4)
default&#xa0;
defaultSo one member was a former Information Commissioner. Another was the current Scottish Public Service Ombudsman. And the third, Dr Richard Kirkham, was someone 
defaultalready very 
defaultwell-known to us at LGO Watch as one of the Local Government Ombudsma
defaultn’s strongest sympathisers
default and allies
default. The following was published on the Ombudsmanwatchers’ website in 2009
default. (The reference in it is to the 2005 select committee evidence session.)
default“Following the damning evidence submitted to the select committee by a num
defaultber of complainants an article was written by Dr Richard Kirkham purporting to be a complainant's view of the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO). However, nothing could be further from the truth. We doubt Dr. Kirkham even bothered to speak to a complainant b
defaultefore writing his article. His article is so pro LGO one could be excused for thinking it was written by a friend of the LGO. After reading his article we decided to find out just who 
defaultDr. 
defaultKirkham
default was and soon discovered that far from being independent he, like the LGO, is also member of the BIOA. Things must be bad if the LGO have to get their friends and colleagues to write positive articles about them in order to shore up their 
defaultevangelical agenda.
defaultDr. Kirkham states in his article 
default'In a recent Parliamentary review of the work of the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO), the Select Committee on the Office of th
defaulte Deputy Prime Minister received a number of submissions from dissatisfied users of the service provided by the LGO (Select Committee on the ODPM, 2004-2005, Ev 
default16-28). In amongst these submissions, there were even proposals for the abolition of the LGO (i
defaultbid., Ev 26). To a certain extent, such criticisms misunderstand the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms and the remit of the Ombudsmen.' 
defaultObviously he forgot about Sir Geoffrey Chipperfield effectively suggesting that during his 1995 review of the defaultLGO.”default&#xa0;
defaultAlthough Dr Kirkham made the claim for his article that it was a “Complainant’s view of the Local Government Ombudsman,” it was 
defaultin fact 
defaultnothing 
defaultother
default than a paean to the LGO at a time when the objectivity of the institution had been called into question by real complainants
default, such as myself
default. 
default(It should also be noted that, despite the LGO’s attempts to dismiss dissatisfied complainants who were campaigni
defaultng to expose the bias of the LGO, in the case I brought to their attention, the LGO found administrative fault and suggested pecuniary compensation for the complainant I was representing. It was the appalling maladministration, dishonesty and subterfuge th
defaultat I discovered in the course of this successful outcome being realised that caused me to set up LGO Watch. The campaign to abolish or reform the LGO was therefore started by the representative of a complainant who had achieved a successful outcome, albeit
default that this outcome came about only because of a persistence and determination 
defaultfuelled by my outrage at institutional injustice committed with impunity against so many people, some of whom were very vulnerable indeed
default.) 
default 
defaultDr Kirkham’s article did not even indicate that he had ever submitted a complaint to the LGO, and so the claim to represent the perspective of a complainant when writing such a 
defaultcomplimentary piece about the LGO
default was highly questionable. 
defaultIt should also be n
defaultoted 
defaultthat Dr Kirkham did not play a
default minor role in the drafting of the “independent” External Evaluation. In the Preface, we are told: 
default&#xa0;
default"Richard Kirkham undertook the bulk of the research and drafting of this Report for which his colleagues are most gratef
defaultul." (p4)
default&#xa0;
defaultI am sure that the LGO is “most grateful” as well.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe following paragraph from the External Evaluation summarises the whitewash that has taken place:
default&#xa0;
default“
defaultThe current programme of change does not undermine our view that the LGO is an organisation
default made up of dedicated and hard-working people who deliver appropriate administrative justice on a daily basis. We also recognise that the LGO has a long track record of being a reflective organisation that has often been a leading innovator in its field.
default”
default 
default(p4)
default&#xa0;
defaultNeedless to say, the Local Government Ombudsman was very pleased at the exoneration given to it by this farcical External Evaluation, and published the following on its website:
defaultAn independent external evaluation of the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO) is published today. It confirms that the LGO is independent and accountable; and it provides clear evidence that the public have access to a fair and effective route to re
defaultdress when they have complaints about local public services and social care providers.”
defaulthttp://www.lgo.org.uk/news/2013/apr/lgo-wel
defaultcomes-independent-confirmation-fair-effective-ombudsman/
default 
defaultConfidence in the CLG Committee has now been completely undermined by its having allowed the LGO to hijack the agenda yet again – this time by setting up its own friendly pseudo-independent investigation. The effect of this is to bolster the LGO’s privileg
defaulted position as a firmly-entrenched master of whitewashing both its own and also local authorities’ maladministration with impunity, and 
defaultof 
defaultmanipulating 
defaultcomplacent 
defaultpoliticians for whom it is more expedient to tinker with the peripherals and to try to give t
defaulthe impression to the public that they are genuinely conc
defaulterned about a failing
default institution, than it is to challenge the blatant injustices that have been brought to their at
defaulttention over the past ten years. If the select committee had been in any way determi
defaultned to ensure a proper 
defaultindependent 
defaultExternal Evaluation was carried out, it would not have 
defaultallowed 
defaultit 
defaultto be commissioned
default by the very institution that was
default being evaluated
default,
default and 
defaultto be
default 
defaultdominated
default b
defaulty 
defaulta 
defaultperson who was a 
defaultcentral and longstanding ally of
default,
default 
defaultand propag
defaultandist for, 
defaultthat institution: something that
default has predictably resulted in an adulatory whitewash that the LGO has been able to publish as a trophy on its website. Such discretion as has been grante
defaultd to the LGO in this instance represents
default a travesty of the k
defaultind of values that the CLG Committee should be championing on behalf of the good citizen.
defaultThe CLG Committee, like its predecessor, the ODPM Committee, is successfully steering a course that avoids robustly challenging the LGO for its appalling institution
defaultal bias,
default for
default its paradigmatic maladministration and 
defaultfor 
defaultits be
defaulttrayal of our citizens. The consequences of the Committee
default doing what the taxpayer actually expects it to 
defaultdo would have been to upset
default 
defaultthe vested interests of 
defaultthose in power and authority who bene
defaultfit from this unjust status quo, and of bringing about the 
defaultpublic 
defaultexposure of the true level of maladministration in local authorities: something that the current party political consensus would 
defaultclearly 
defaultlike to avoid. 
defaultI 
defaultam ashamed of how badly the ODPM
default Co
defaultmmittee and the CLG Committee have let 
defaultdown 
defaultthe people of this countr
defaulty
default. Political expediency,
default complacency 
defaultand indifference to 
defaultintense 
defaulth
defaultuman suffering caused by
default institutional injustice, 
defaulthave 
defaultall 
defaultbeen allowed to trump pri
defaultnciple
default, and to trump the value of 
defaultconscientious, impartia
defaultl and properly concerned
default conduct in political life
default. No wonder 
defaultso many people in this country feel 
defaultdisenfranchised from the political system, and no wonder 
defaultso many 
defaultpeople feel
default cynical about
default the behaviour and motivation of
default politicians.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultGary Powell
defaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default