&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultUNCORRECTED TRANSCRIPT OF ORAL EVIDENCE
default              
default 
defaultTo be published as HC 763-i
defaulthouse of commons
defaultoral evidence
defaulttaken before the
defaultTreasury Committee
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultMonetary Policy: Forward Guidance default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWednesday 23 October 2013
defaultJens Larsen, 
defaultSIMON WELLS
default 
defaultand 
defaultROBERT WOOD
default&#xa0;
defaultEvidence heard in 
defaultPublic
default              
defaultQuestions 
default1 - 
default8
default4
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultUSE OF THE TRANSCRIPT
default1.
defaultThis is an uncorrected transcript of evidence taken in public and reported to the House. The transcript has been placed on the internet on the authority of the Committee, and copies have been made available by the Vote Office for the use of Members and others.
default&#xa0;
default2.
defaultAny public use of, or reference to, the contents should make clear that neither witnesses nor Members have had the opportunity to correct the record. The transcript is not yet an approved formal record of these proceedings.
default&#xa0;
default3.
defaultMembers
default who receive this for the purpose of correcting questions addressed by them to witnesses are asked to send corrections to the Committee Assistant.
default&#xa0;
default4.
defaultProspective witnesses
default may receive this in preparation for any written or oral evidence they may in due course give to the Committee.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultOral Evidence
defaultTaken before the 
defaultTreasury Committee
defaulton 
defaultWednesday 23 October 2013
defaultMembers present
default:
defaultMr Andrew Tyrie (
defaultChair
default)
defaultMark Garnier
defaultAndrea
default Leadsom
defaultMr Pat McFadden
defaultMr George Mudie
default________________
default 
defaultExamination of WitnessesdefaultWitnesses:
default 
defaultJens Larsendefault, Managing Director and Chief European Economist, Capital Markets, Royal Bank of Canada,
default defaultSimon Wellsdefault, Chief UK Economist, HSBC Holdings PLC, and
default 
defaultRobert Wooddefault, Chief U
defaultK Economist, Berenberg Bank, 
defaultgave evidence.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ1 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Thank you very much for coming in to see us this afternoon. Do not feel obliged, all th
defaultree of you, to answer all questions
default but
default please do chip in
default if you have something that is demonstrably different from what one
default of your colleagues has said
default. What do you think the bank had in mind when they created forward guidance? I will go to Mr Larsen, Mr Wood and then Mr Wells.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think the bank had it in 
defaultmind to reduce uncertainty. It was not quite to reduce uncertainty in the way that the market or perhaps the public expected it, which is to reduce the uncertainty unconditionally about where interest rates were going, but to reduce the uncertainty about their reaction function, to make people understand the circumstances in which they would change monetary policy. I think a great deal of the disappointment in 
defaultthe 
defaultmarkets reflects that. They were expecting a more unconditional statement, a clearer commitment of some kind, whereas th
defaulte committee’s aim was 
defaultmore to clarify the circumstances surrounding an eventual rate hike.
default 
default 
defaultRobert Wooddefault: 
defaultI pretty much agree with that. I think guidance more or less describes what the bank was already doing, which is trying to support the economy as much as possible.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ2 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default That would mean loosening policy.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Yes, and I think the unemployment rate they have given is a bit more certainty about how they see the economy and where they want to head to, s
defaulto it was aiming at giving 
defaultmore transparenc
defaulty and 
defaultcertainty about, in the jargon, their reaction function or how they would behave.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ3 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default T
defaulto be clear, when you say 
default“
defaults
defaultupport 
defaultthe economy as much as possible
default”
default, 
defaultdo 
defaultyou mean support the economy more than it had been supported by the monetary p
defaultolicy as explained hitherto?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: If you are asking me if I thought it was a loosening of policy, my answer would be yes, a little bit. In answer to the initial question you asked, I think it w
defaultas extra transparency and 
defaultmore certainty about its goals and what it was aiming for.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ4 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Yes, but one of t
defaulthe things it was aiming for—indeed, a crucial purpose—was 
defaultto loose
defaultn policy. That is what you 
defaulteffectively said.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I think it did loosen policy a little bit, yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ5 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Therefore
default it has fulfilled its purpos
defaulte, or is fulfilling its purpose?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Yes, 
defaultI guess you could say that.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ6 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Mr Wells?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: The others have covered the s
defaulttated aims quite well. T
defaulthere is another unstated aim we hav
defaulte to look at. If
default we rewind to the beginning of the year, we were still talking about triple dip recessions in the 
defaultUK
default, the economy looked like it was heading for another tough year, and there was some reasonable demand from people and politicians for the Bank of England to do something, when there was not an awful lot left in its toolkit. I think the forward guidance we saw was in some sense a necessary response to some of the pressure that they were under at that time.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ7 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default That is an explanation for 
defaulthow we got to where we are. 
defaultI think there is one dis
defaultsenter from the three of you to
default this
default,
default on the basis of what you have said so far. This did loosen policy a bit, it did increase transparency a little, and it has increased certainty a little. Is there any disagreement? I think there is a bit of disagreement from Mr Larsen on the last. 
defaultJens Larsendefault: As
default with
default every statement that has to do with forward guidance, it is a conditional statement. I have learned more about the bank’s reaction function, but I have sat down and thought very hard about it and constructed my own unemployment 
defaultforecast
default 
defaultand studied the documents very careful
defaultly. T
defaulthere is a slightly different perception
default among the people I speak to in the market
default, which is that this has no
defaultt reduced uncertainty and
default has created 
defaultmore confusion about what 
defaultthe bank is trying to do 
defaultand how this is meant to work
default—
defaultfor instance, how the status 
defaultof the bank
default’s inflation forecast 
defaulthas changed, whether the unemployment threshold is a threshold or a trigger, and so 
defaulton. There are many dimensions of this policy that 
defaultI can just about keep in my head, but I do spend a lot of time thinking about it.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ8 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default You seem to be saying 
defaultsomething rather different
default there
default, which is that this is extreme
defaultly complex, sophisticated stuff
default and that any reaction people might have had is probably from ignorance.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I would not say it is extremely complicated and I would not say
default it is ignorance. W
defaulthen the bank has tried to set out in
default words what it is trying to do—
defaultwhich is effectively saying that this recovery is likely to be different and that it wants to keep rates low until it has come to the point where you have strong growth for a while, where employment has increased, unless 
defaultthey see a risk to inflation or 
defaultthere is a financial stability risk—I think those words are quite clear. I am less sure that the threshold and the three knockouts add much to cl
defaultarity. I changed my mind on that
default. I thought in advance that this might be a good idea with the specific t
defaulthresholds and 
defaultknockouts, 
defaultbut it has turned out 
defaultthat these have been misunderstood.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ9 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Yes. Y
defaultou seemed to be saying a moment ago that they were decreasing certainty, adding to uncertainty.
defaultJens Larsendefault: Taking the unemployment threshold as an example, if you put out a numerical and very precise threshold, 7%, and you publish a forecast, you should expect people
default to look very carefully at that
default forecast and interpret th
defaulte 7% as something very
default specific. I think most markets have a perception tha
defaultt that is, if not exactly, 
defaultcertainly so
defaultmething very close to a trigger
default where mone
defaulttary policy is likely to be tightened
default. The MPC has since been very clear in emphasising that 
defaultit is not a trigger but
default a chance to r
defaulte-evaluate monetary policy. I
defaultt is a chance to think again about the inflation forecast at the point at which unemployment is 7%. 
defaultI think that rather diminishes the clarity and importance of the 7% threshold
default and the mar
defaultket is focusing much more on w
defaulthen i
defaults unemployment going to hit 7%.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ10 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default I am trying to summarise that again. Yo
defaultu are saying that it is complex
default and that they have
default therefore 
defaultreduced certainty. That is what I said a moment ago.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I agree, yes. I t
defaulthink it is complex and 
defaultthe straightforward formulation of forward guidance is much more helpful.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ11 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Is it more complex in reducing certainty, Mr Wood and Mr Wells?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: 
defaultI pretty much agree with what Jens said. It is a complicated way of saying something pretty simple, which was where I started out, which is, “We think the economy can grow pretty quickly over the next few years. We are going to do all we can to support that by keeping interest rates low, and we are going to do that until we see some strong growth, unemployment coming down and the economy looking better”. The
defaultre is a simple message in there
default but the imple
defaultmentation of it has been 
defaultcomplicated. The executive summary in the document runs to three p
defaultages, which I think is a 
defaultcomplicated way of saying something you could probably put in one sentence.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I agree with the others. In a way, what the Bank of England is trying to say is, “This time it is different. This time we will see strong data, strong demand, and economic supply will respond as well, so there will be less inflationary pressures”. I think the problem is that message is not getting through to the market. The market is saying, “This time it is not different. We are going to see strong data, we are going to see strong demand, and then you are going to tighten policy”. The top level message is quite simple, but operationalising it has proved quite complicated for them.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ12 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default I know others may come on to this more in a moment. Do you think it has made the first tightening more difficult because it is focusing so much attention now on the detailed triggers for this that we run a greate
defaultr risk than we might have done of what appears to have happened in America, where just talking about tapering the extremely loose policy generated a flurry of concern in the markets?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: With any new and unorthodox policy, the further you go down that route, th
defaulte harder exit
default is. I think forward guidance has been yet another step to try to keep monetary conditions as loose as possible for as long as possible, and in that sense it certainly complicates exit. More generally, by putting this simple message out—which is that despite the recovery, interest rates are going to stay lower for longer—of course, if the Bank of England’s
default forecasts turn out to be wrong and
default all of our forecasts 
defaultturn out to be wrong, then 
defaultthe element of surprise to any eventual tightening is going to be greater. 
defaultJens Larsendefault: M
defaulteasuring it in terms of uncertainty or volatility about interest rates, this policy will lead to
default volatility around the point at
default which we are getting close to the threshold. Indeed, that is why the bank, as Charlie Bean said yesterday, is likely to have to do some more forward guidance at that point, either by lowering the unemployment threshold or by giving some other shape of forward guidance. 
defaultThere is more in
default the
default pipeline.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ13 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default In other word
defaults, 
defaultwe have to generate more of this complexity and uncertainty in order to reduce the risk of even greater complexity and uncertainty at the time of exit. That is what you have just said.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think that is right, yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ14 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default That does not sound like a ringing endorsement of this policy.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I do not think it is a ringing—
default&#xa0;
defaultQ15 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default 
defaultBut you 
defaultbegan quite enthusiastic
defaultally
default, Mr Larsen.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I would not say I am overly enthusiastic. It is a difficult policy. The exit in any case is going to be a very difficult point to administer, and I think more communication is likely to be needed. Whether they had done forward guidance or not, that exit would have been a tricky one. At the moment there is a very simple message on the exit strategy, which is about raising rates and then selling assets subsequently, but when it comes to it, guidin
defaultg expectations about the path for
default interest rates and asset sales at that point will be very difficult indeed, forward guidance or not.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ16 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Is anybody disagreeing with that, before I move on?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: No. I would just add that exiting from a long period of very low interest rates would have been hard either way. If they had not given us an unemployment threshold, we would probably have been speculating about what it was. We have one now, so there is going to be a lot of focus on passing that particular number, and no doubt we will see more guidance as we get to it. Either way, it would have been pretty difficult, and as we approached a period where rates would probably have had to go up, the
defaultn we would have had
default the speculation anyway.
defaultChairdefault:default We are only looking here today at the difference between forward guidance and not forward guidance, whic
defaulth was the pre-existing policy, s
defaulto we are talking about the additional help or hindrance that we get from t
defaulthat policy to exit.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ17 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default It sounds less like forward guidance and more like 
defaultforward obfuscation, doesn’t it
default?
defaultJens Larsendefault: That mig
defaultht be a little unkind. I 
defaultthink the history here matte
defaultrs, as Simon said earlier. 
defaultMark Car
defaultney started talking about nominal
default GDP targeting 
defaultback in December of last year. W
defaulthen the Treasury decided to do a review of the remit, the circumstances were very different and the need for further monetary stimulus was more obvious. I think if forward guidance had been introduced in an environment of that kind, where 
defaultUS
default interest rates were rising but the outlook for the 
defaultUK
default economy continued to be very weak, then the policy might have made more of a step of distinguishing between those conditions in the 
defaultUS
default and the 
defaultUK
default. 
defaultAs it was, we ended up having both rising 
defaultUS
default interest rates and a very consistent stream of positive macro news in the 
defaultUK
default, and I think that is what has made this policy quite difficult to implement. You could say it is the 
defaultUK
default econom
defaulty that has done it. At the time
default this policy or this review and the subsequent decisions made sense,
default or made more sense. Since then
default the economy has clearly changed tack.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ18 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default I
defaultt is improving anyway. W
defaulthere a lot of people find a bit of confusion is
default that
default we are now
default talking about forward guidance and
default everybody is obsessing about—and you ar
defaulte right to raise the point—whether it is a threshold or a target.
default They keep repeating back to us that it is very much a threshold, and there are obviously these knockouts. Now people are focusing very much on unemployment rates, whereas ultimately the MPC
default has a mandate to try to maintain
default inflation at 2.5%. What happens if inflation starts going up? You could have a hypothetical situation where the economy st
defaultops looking so good.
default 
defaultYou have a weakness in sterling
default and then you start importing inflation at the same time as unemployment is rising,
default and
default yet the MPC’s overriding mandate will be to try to keep inflation under control. How do you think the markets would react to that kind of scenario unfolding?
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think they would go back to thinking about the MPC much as they did in the past three years, where the MPC was very consiste
defaultnt in seeing through externally-
defaultdriven inflation. If it is 
defaultan external shock
default—
defaultif it is driven by, say, ext
defaulternal commodity prices or
default, for that matter, energy prices domestically
default—
defaultthen I think the MPC would continue to be quite comfortable with s
defaulteeing through that, and 
defaultthe market
default would do that too. T
defaulthere is an issue here, which is that that kind of response, that kind of bias, has been taken for granted by now. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ19 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default Energy price rises and a weakening
default of
default the currency are slightly different things. 
defaultJens Larsendefault: Absolutely, where the weakening of the currency is clearly influenced by the setting of monetary policy.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ20 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default What was interesting
default about this was that
default when the forward guidance first came out, in the summer I think it was, it was pretty clear that it was going
default to be the 7% unemployment rate
default and it was expected that the unemployment rate would not fall below 7%. It would get close to 7% for another three years, so the inference then was that you have three years of low interest rates to work with. Immediately, the markets closed that up and started suggesting it was going to be more like two years or 18 months. The markets 
defaultare 
defaulta better indicator of what is going to happen, what these people think are going to happen. Does the fact that the markets ignored t
defaulthis, effectively 
defaultstraightaway,
default mean that forward guidance as far as the markets are concerned is com
defaultpletely irrelevant?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Given the strength of some of the data that we saw coming out of the UK economy through the summer, in the absence of forward guidance—not just the announcement in August but the previous forward-forward guidance
default,
default in July and before—we would have seen market interest rates rise potentially quite a bit more th
defaultan they did. P
defaultolicy
default is looser now than it
default might have
default been, so I think, 
defaultcompared to the untestable counterfactual, policy is slightly looser. 
defaultIn terms of why the market s
defaultees things happening first, it
default should potentially rile the MPC a little that it plainly does not share their assessment of
default the economy, but the MPC can’t
default be too surprised, given its recent forecast record over the past few years, that
default the market is not believing their
default forecast as g
defaultospel. Th
defaultat is basically it. It comes back to whether the market shares the assessm
defaultent of the MPC, and it does not
default,
default because it just sees the strong data and, to a certain extent, sees that feeding through to inflationary pressure, which the MPC does not. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ21 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default Your point about the counterfactual is quite important. What you are saying
default is
default that
default if we had not had forward guidance
default,
default interest rates would be that much higher i
defaultn the markets than they are now
default and
default,
default even though interest rates have gone up, it is still looser than it would have been otherwise. Do you all agree with that analysis?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Yes
default;
default modestly. I do not think it is an en
defaultormous effect
default but
default modestly, directionally, that is the right direction. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ22 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Just to be clear on that—it is a very important point—you are arguing that the whole of the rise in yields that we have seen is accounted for by non-UK-specific factors
default; 
defaultthat is
default,
default global yield adjustment?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: No. 
defaultI would want to be careful about the period of time I was looking over the rise of yields. Was it from late July to August, in which case there is probably an eleme
defaultnt of surprise in this guidance
default that it was not quite as aggressive as expected? Or do I want to
default look at
default, say, the end of last year to now, when the rise is much less significant and is probably a lot smaller than I would have anticipated, given the strength of data over the summer
default?
default&#xa0;
defaultQ23 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default This is 
defaultUK
default data over the summer?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Absolutely, yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ24 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default So, the markets have pr
defaulticed in quite a big shift that
default did not in fact turn out to be warranted?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ25 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default Th
defaulte inference of that is that the
default forward guidance is probably having more of an effect than we give it credit for.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: If you are giving it no credit, then the answer would be yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ26 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default I think you have summarised that
default quite nicely
default. Can I turn to a slightly different thing? We have talked about the markets, where we are pretty sophisticated and have clever fellows like you looking at this stuff. What about the man in the street? Who do you think, first of all, forward guidance is aimed at? Do you think it is aimed at t
defaulthe markets
default or do you think it is aimed at the wider economy, the household and the small business and medium-sized business?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: As implemented in early August, with the data pretty strong at the time
default—
defaultwe have talked about it being a modest easing
default,
default but not a massiv
defaulte one
default—in 
defaultthat situation, most probably 
defaultit is ai
defaultmed 
defaultat the public. The message on the day was pretty simple. We have tried to boil it down to one sentence, and I think the message was, “Rates on hold for three years”. That was the message the day after. The bank was obviously a lot more careful when speaking at the press conference,
default but that was the broad message
default and I think that is probably what they were aiming for.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ27 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default W
defaulte have seen, broa
defaultdly speaking, since then a pickup in housing activity, which can partly be explained by the vari
defaultous measures being brought in
default by Governmen
defaultt and a bit of confidence. D
defaulto you think that sending a message out that interest rates are going to stay this low for another three years is going to give people a spur to get into the housing market while the good times, in terms of interest rates, only last for another three years?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: The one bit of evidence I would point to is surveys of when people think inte
defaultrest rates are going to go up. T
defaulthe m
defaultarket do one of those. The proportion of people who expected rates to rise within two years fell pretty sharply in the month after the Bank of England did this guidance. It has subsequently gone back up. The proportion is still lower than it was in July, even though
default in the meantime people are 
defaultmuch more confident about the economy. You might have otherwise expected it to be higher now than back in July. That is the se
defaultnse, in a way, in which 
defaultthis has had a modest effec
defaultt. 
defaultI think the way
default that
default people would react to believing interest rates will remain low is to probably bo
defaultrrow a bit more, buy more goods
default and probably houses as well. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ28 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default It is quite
default an interesting proposition. 
defaultUK
default households are,
default as you
default know, 
defaultvery heavily in debt. There is just under 
default£1.5 trillion in household debt and about
default £1.2 trill
defaultion is in mortgages. 
defaultI know, looking across the piece, it i
defaults not necessarily that alarming
default but it is 
defaultpretty alarming. Clearly, those households that
default are
default in debt 
defaultfeel pretty vulnerable. The Bank of Engl
defaultand has done surveys looking at
default if you see a 2% rise in the base rate, then it is going
default to
default put 28% of mortgages by value int
defaulto that problematic area for the 
defaulthouseholds. Do you think this is giving the right message out to the consumer or the wrong message? Do you think it is giving people a false sense of security, or do you think it genuinely is giving help to those households that could be suffering under rising interest rates?
defaultJens Larsendefault: To the extent that it is providing clarity about
default policymakers’ intentions—
defaultit is not misleading or confusing about what it 
defaultis the bank intends to do—
defaultI do not think it is a bad policy. I do not think it contributes to over-indebtedness. It gives you a sense of conditions, and people then should make up their minds. It is not the Monetary Policy Committee’s job to tell the consumers
default, or for that matter
default firms
default,
default what the right decision is. It is to provide a sense of what their intentions are in the current environment.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ29 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default T
defaulthe key point of this is, as we heard from you, Mr Larsen,
default right at the beginning,
default that
default this is an immensely complex thing. You do not know whether it is a threshold or a target. There are three knockouts. Nobody is really talking about the knockouts at all. Nobody really understands what the unempl
defaultoyment means or what an
default equilibrium rate of 6.5% means. It is all pretty random stuff. By the time you start drilling down into this, this is not the sort of easy conversation 
defaultthat you would have down at the Dog and Duck. It is quite complex. How do you ration
defaultalise that complexity
default whe
defaultn what consumers want are 
defaultvery simple messages?
defaultJens Larsendefault: As I said, I think the bank has made a statement that is very simple, and 
defaultprovided they honour that—that is
default,
default that 
defaultwe only
default see rising policy 
defaultrates at the point at which we have strong growth, strong
default employment and rising incomes—
defaultI do not think consumers will feel misled. If they
default had
default walked away with the impression that it was three years
default,
default and it was definitely three years
default,
default and that
default was what the bank had promised
default and had made decis
defaultions on the basis of that, 
defaultthat would not be very good. I think the bank has managed to get across the message that this is about the circumst
defaultances in which rates will go up
default,
default and that is a good way away. I think things are looking better. 
defaultAt the same time, I would say people hopefully do not make housing or mortgage decisions on the basis of only what interest rates are going to do in the next two years. H
defaultopefully there is an awareness—
defaultand the bank h
defaultas certainly talked about that—
defaultthat rates will go up at some point. It is not about it going up immediately, but it will go up at some point. That message is tremendously important. Again, the bank would rightly point to the fact that mortgage lending has yet to pick up pace. If you see consumer credit picking up anywhere, it is in unsecured credit, whether that is credit cards or in other unsecured lending. The secured lending growth rate is reall
defaulty very modest.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ30 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default I can see 
defaultwhere Mark Carney is coming from in this
default,
default in terms of trying to give guidance to households. Of course, in his previous job he could pretty much ma
defaultke these decisions 
defaultby himself. Do you think this really deep complexity of how forward guidance works, with
default all these various caveats and 
defaultGod 
defaultknows what, reflects more the fact that he had to come 
defaultup with some technical thing to get it
default through the MPC, or do you think this is just genuinely the MPC lifti
defaultng up its bonnet and showing everybody
default how the engine works?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I would say mostly the latter. To boil it down to one number, 
defaultunemployment, and three caveats
default for a whole economy, which we kn
defaultow is a hugely
default complicated thing,
default is simplifying a lot already. So I think m
defaultostly the latter. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ31 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default Did he have to do it to get it through the MPC?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: H
defaulte had to do it in order to correctly explain how the Monetary Policy Committee is making its decisions
default. The decisions are complicated
default; 
defaulttherefore
default you are going to need to descr
defaultibe that in some way. You can’t
default boil it down to just, “We are going to keep rates low for three years”.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ32 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default So you don’t
default think he was simply starting off 
defaultby saying, “Let’s try to
default keep it down at 3%” and then had to create this argument to get
default it
default through the MPC? Do you think it was a genuine process that they all came to and 
defaultthat 
defaultth
defaultey are just lifting the lid on the bonnet and showing everybody
default?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I can’t
default speak for what he planned to do or what happened, but the fact that the unemployment rate was probably
default at
default the top end of the range that we would have expected, and there were three caveats, whereas you may well have been able to have two, probably speaks
default to the things we have seen in the MPC minutes
default—
defaultthat not everyone thought more stimulus was needed. I think there was that sentence in the minutes around August that some members thought interest rates were in roughly the right place. With a committee of nine, there 
defaultare plainly disagreements there
default,
default and I think you can see that probably in the three caveats that you have.
defaultJens Larsendefault: 
defaultI think it is important too that the framework from the MPC’s perspective is helpful in structuring their uncertainty and their different views on the economy, so this threshold can accommodate very different views about how fast the unemployment rate is going to fall and how quickly productivity i
defaults going to pick up. There is
default a very wide range of views on that on the committee and it is difficult to squash it all together. The unemployment threshold does that. It allows people to hold different views, yet signin
defaultg up to the framework. T
defaulthat is an important point. 
defaultThe second bit that is important is that it preserves the individual accountability. All of them are very aware that they have to be accountable to you and to the public. Therefore, retaining an individual responsibility, which the kn
defaultockout
defaults give them a chance to
default, is very significant for them.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I 
defaultwould add that we should not be at all surprised about the nature of the knockouts. The primary mandate is still to preserve price stability. It would not have been particularly helpful or sensible for the MPC to set a copper-bottom
defaulted
default guarantee that it was going to keep rates on hold until 2016. In that sense, we should not be s
defaulturprised with the design of it
default at all. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ33 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default 
defaultUnwinding, when interest rates start to rise and the bank starts taking action, what do you expect t
defaulto happen first
default:
default intervention in
default the asset purchase programme
default, sell
defaulting the assets, or movement of the base rate?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I would think neither. The first
default thing they would do is
default stop reinvesting the maturing gilts that are currently in their portfolio, see how the m
defaultarket reacted to that, and then
default a few 
defaultmonths down the line after that
default dip their toe in the water with a very small interest rate rise.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ34 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default That is a QE move, really.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: It is a QE move.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ35 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default It is important, because there is not that much clarity. We keep hearing—
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: None at all.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ36 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default 
defaultIt is interesting to know
default what you, as the representative
defaults of the markets, think—
defaultQE a
defaultction or QE inaction, I think you were suggesting.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: QE inaction, rate action, and then only
default,
default some way down the line, almost as a matter of principle, the bank will want to sell some of the bonds back to the market, but that will be a long way down. I expect most of them just to roll off and mature. 
defaultJens Larsendefault: I am firmly of the belief that they will raise interest rates first.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ37 default&#xa0; 
defaultMark Garnier:default Base rate first?
defaultJens Larsendefault: With t
defaulthe idea of letting reinvestment roll off, you do not have control over the t
defaultiming or the size. Y
defaultou may test the waters, but I think the bank will want to raise rates at a point at which they are confident they can raise rates a couple of notche
defaults, and when they have done that
default they will feel more comfortable starting to sell the assets. Whether that involves stopping reinvestment f
defaultirst or selling assets straight
defaultaway, there is less certainty about that, but I think rates will come first.
defaultMark Garnier:default Mr Wood?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Rates first.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ38 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Is that not an area where they wan
defaultt symmetry
default,
default in the sense of a sym
defaultmetry of uncertainty between those options? The last thing you want is to be boxed in, as 
defaultAmerica
default is experiencing.
defaultJens Larsendefault: The 
defaultUK
default money market functions very differently from those of the 
defaultUS
default, so some of the steps that the Americans will have to take in order to be able to raise rates will not have to be taken
default her
defaulte
default. We do not have that se
defaultparation between different players in the money market
default, so putting up 
defaultb
defaultank 
defaultr
defaultate will work straight
defaultaway, whereas in the 
defaultUS
default you probably have to reduce the level of liquidity before you start raising the target for the federal funds rate. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ39 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Are these two policies taking money in and out of slightly dif
defaultferent pockets in the economy? 
defaultAre they 
defaultnot
default the same?
defaultJens Larsendefault: That is certainly true, and I think the uncertainty associated with an unwinding of QE is almost surely as big as it was for the purchase. It is very dependent on the circumstances. It dep
defaultends on how you do it and 
defaulton the state of markets at that point, the state of fiscal affairs and so on. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ40 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default I want to
default ask you about 
defaultthe 
defaulttimesc
defaultale. You said that the 
defaultsimple way of understanding the forward guidance was, “Keep rates on hold for three years”. Th
defaulte bank said in its own forecast
default when it announced the policy that it expected the 7% unemployment threshold to be hit around ab
defaultout the third quarter of 2016. W
defaulthen do you think, looking at it today, we are likely to hit the 7% thresh
defaultold?
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think the early part of 2016 is the likely point.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Q3 2015.
defaultMr McFadden:default T
defaulthat is a good bit sooner.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Yes.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Q4 2015.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ41 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default You two are saying two years and you are saying a little bit more.
default Even 
defaultthe most optimistic 
defaultunemployment threshold here is
default that
default it will be about two years before this threshold gets hit. What is the point of the MPC for the next two years?
defaultJens Larsendefault: They can discuss when they are going to hit the 7%.
default The MPC minutes today
default made clear that the nature of the MPC’s discussion, as long as you are in forward guidance, is very 
defaultdifferent. You do not get 
defaultwhat I would call monetary strategy discussions about the framework and how to intervene and so on. It is a very clean assessment of whether you have hit the threshold or not, whether any of the knockouts are knocked out. If not, rates will not move. You still have to
default make that assessment. MPC members, who 
defaultare all drawing a salary and 
defaultare
default all
default individually
default accountable to you and the 
defaultpublic, want to carry on doing that assessment. Of course, 
defaultyou do not want to turn up and find that that 
defaultmonetary policy decision reverts to something more akin to what we saw prior to forward guidance.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: T
defaulthe thing I would say is that you have to do this anyway. Whether the Bank of England had told us or not that it was not going to raise rates until unemployment hit 7%, they are probably having t
defaulthat sort of debate anyway. Y
defaultou can see that in the speeches and so on, when they talk about, “The economy has a long way to go, and we think interest rates need to remain low for a long time”. The only change is th
defaultat we know about that now. O
defaultn a month-to-month basis, unless something dramatic happens, we are probably not going to get a change in interest rates, but I think that is probably what happens from month to month anyway. Unless something big changes, you do not tend to move interest rates on a monthly basis.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ42 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default Might it be sensible for them
default to
default say, “Now that we have this forward guidance and now that the most optimistic 
defaultforecasters in the market don’t
default expect this threshold to come for at least two years, we will just give this a rest for six months at least”? That 
defaultis perfectly rational, isn’t
default?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I certainly think Mr Carney has achieved what
default Mervyn King always wanted to in making monetary policy very boring, and certainly for the 
defaultnext few years. I think
default by law
default they have to meet eve
defaultry month. You are quite right
default:
default w
defaulthether that system is right for the current framework is a good question.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ43 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default The point I am driving at, without being too light about it, is
default 
defaultthat t
defaulthis has changed the job descri
defaultption of MPC members 
defaultin quite a material way
default, hasn’t it
default?
defaultJens Larsendefault: If you look at the August 
defaultinflation report
default, there is more emphasis on the unemployment forecast. The inflation forecast is primarily presented through t
defaulthe presentation of the knockout
default,
default rather than through the traditional
default fan
default 
defaultchart. Even if you just look at it that way, I think there is a difference in the MPC’s approach to p
defaultolicy and 
defaultin its communication. I agree with that.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ44 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default Emphasis has been placed on individual accountability of MPC members. We discussed that a few minutes ago. In the context of a forward guidance framework, isn’t there less individual responsibility? All but one of them are signed up to this framework anyway, so they have set themselves on this trajectory where things are n
defaultot expected to change. We
default can argue about whether it is two or three years, but they are not expected to change for a while. Although you are saying they meet and review things anyway, it is not the sa
defaultme, is it? There is a different
default context now
default,
default through this new remit.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: There is definite
defaultly a different context. I 
defaultagree with that. We are talking about trying to look at three specific knockouts now, rather than, as Jens said, looking at the
default fan
default 
defaultchart. I agree the emphasis is different. Where there probably still is individual accountability is if, six months or three months down the line, an MPC member felt that 7% was the wrong number
default—
defaultthat inflation was going to pick up before unemployment hit that
default—
defaultthen one of the knockouts can be triggered, and in that sense they can have individual accountability that is not tied to that specific nu
defaultmber. There is still some there
default,
default but clearly, as you say, the context is very different to it.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think it goes to the question you asked earlier. What happens in the circumstance where we get a big external shock to inflation
default—
defaulta long-lasting shock that will shift inflation forecasts for a long period of time? If an MPC member thinks that the appropriate answer to that is to raise rates, then they have an obligation to stick up their hand and say there has been a knockout.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ45 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default When this was introduced in 
defaultCanada
default, things
default were pretty much at the bottom
default and it was intended to set a path to calm things down, restore confidence and give people some certainty about the forward path. Do you think forward guidance is a policy for all seasons, or is it less useful 
defaultin
default the
default circumstances that we are in
default,
default where it looks like we are at the early stages of an economi
defaultc recovery?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I think, given its stated aims, it is more
default powerful in the recovery phase
default,
default because if we had been told back in early 2012 that rates were going to be on hold for two years, we probably would have all shrugged our shoulders and said, “But we knew that a
defaultnyway”. T
defaulthe fact that the bank is trying to say that this recovery is a bit different in nature and it will be able to keep policy 
defaultlooser for longer does mean
default it has potentially more power now than right at the bottom. 
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I would disagree a little bit. Right now, at a time when the economy appears to be picking up some momentum over the summer—we have not had hard GDP data, of course, but surveys are looking a lo
defaultt stronger—it is hard to 
defaultshift expectations of when that first rate rise is going to be, and indeed until you have seen the bank doing something that is more or less what they were doing before
default; that is, 
defaulta little bit of a loosening but nothing dramatic. If you had introduced this in December last year, maybe it would have been mor
defaulte important. 
defaultW
defaulte
default may be grateful it is there 
defaultwhen interest rates get closer to rising, and we covered that a little bit earlier.
default We probably would have had 
defaultheavy speculation about when the bank would raise rates anyway, and now we have a bit m
defaultore clarity about that
default—
defaultn
defaultot
default as much as we would have liked
default but a little bit more
default—
defaultand I think that will be important.
defaultJens Larsendefault: In the current circumstances, where the focus is more squarely on the eventual exit, even if it is a long way away, I think it would have been more helpful to give a straight int
defaulterest rate forecast
default,
default of the kind
default that you would have
default seen from FOMC, for instance
default;
default a
default description of the economic circumstances
default,
default like the ones we have had
default,
default about when you want to raise rates
default;
default and then a forecast from the MPC, maybe as
default a
default committee or maybe as individuals, about when they think interest rates will actually go up.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ46 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr McFadden:default This is 
defaulta
defaultssociated personally with the new governor, isn’t it?
default 
defaultIt is his shtick—his 
defaultpersonal thing. Do you think there are dangers in that? We were talking a second ago about the individual accountability of MPC members. Do you think there is a danger that, thinking about all these knockouts and caveats and what have you, MPC members might be a bit reluctant to reassess the timescale, for example, that the bank originally came out with
default,
default because that might look as
default though it was undermining the g
defaultovernor, and that is something they would not want to do? Are there potential policy implications of having something that is so a
defaultssociated with the new governor?
defaultJens Larsendefault: The process that led to the forward guidance policy gave me 
defaultsome concerns about that. All those steps—
defaultthe review, Mark Carney’s speech, the new remit, but also the statement that the MPC made in July about it not thinking that market
default rates were at the right level—send
default str
defaultong signals about what the new g
defaultovernor intended to do, which I think was unfortunate
default,
default in that they all acted to raise expectations about the transformation that a n
defaultew governor could make. Already by now
default we are at a more comfortable place in that sense, and I do not think the risk of the MPC members holdin
defaultg back in order to support the g
defaultovernor is all that important. Things are, in that sense, bedding down just fine.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: In principle, 
defaultit is a risk to have a policy associated with one person on the committee, because 
defaultit is nine taking the decision.
default In practice, I think the MPC have proved themselves happy to say wh
defaultat they feel about the policy. So in practice I 
defaultagree with Je
defaultns’
defaults
default conclusion, but 
defaultin principle I think it is a risk to have a policy associated with one person.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I 
defaultagree with that.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ47 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Before I pass over the questioning 
defaultto George Mudie, you have said, 
defaultSimon Wells, 
default“
defaultThat
default 
defaultwould take us close to the May 2015 general election. With the political debate increasingly revolving around the cost of living and around half of the 
defaultUK
default’s mortgage stock linked to Bank Rate in some way, it would be a brave move to tighten policy around the election.
default”
default If that is the conclusion of the way monetary policy is run now, is it not a colossal indictment of what has happened over a run of years, and it may be across Governments
default—
defaultthat we have effectively succeeded, bit by bit, in comp
defaultromising the central purpose of Bank of England independence in the 1997 A
defaultct?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: 
defaultThe specific backdrop to that comment was that the market then was pricing in 
defaultthe first rate rise in April 2015, which I 
defaultthought was a highly unlikely month to see the first interest rate rise. The bigger picture is exa
defaultctly the one that you mention. In the 1980s we had 
defaultaver
defaultage inflation of 7%, much 
defaulthigher in the 1970s, and because
default 
defaultthings have happened over the past few years, it is easy to forget the great achievements of independent monetary policy and divorcing monetar
defaulty policy from the political sphere
default.
defaultChairdefault:default Tackling inflationary expectations.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Exactly. E
defaultven though inflation peaked at 5.2% in 2011 and we have had all this forward guidance, inflation expectations have stayed very well anchored, and that is to the credit of the Bank of England. We did also have the first remit change under the MPC this year, and
default I suppose the question is
default:
default 
defaultis that the thin end 
defaultof the wedge
default and are we going
default to see more frequent remit changes in the coming years, or was that very much a one-off for exceptional circumstances? If we did see very frequent remit change for the MPC, there is
default,
default of course
default,
default the potential to undermine the inflation credibility.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ48 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Maybe I could have framed my q
defaultuestion more crisply. H
defaultave we allowed politics back into monetary policy?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I think the Bank of England is to some extent being dragged into the political sphere a lot more than it had been when the going was great in the early 2000s. I do not think the 
defaultUK
default is unique in that either. The Federal Reserve is being dragged in, and I think the ECB is, b
defaultut to some extent that is—
default&#xa0;
defaultQ49 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Sorry to interrupt. It is the
default inevitable consequence of the fact that you need to run fiscal and monetary policy in extremely close tandem in a deflationary crisis, unlike an inf
defaultlationary crisis
default where separation carries huge benefits in the markets. 
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Yes. It is partly that
default,
default but it is partly
default,
default given the financial cri
defaultsis that we have been through, 
defaultthat 
defaultc
defaultentral banks ultimately have to answer to you and to the people, so there is a democratic legitimacy argument 
defaultto all of this as well. I can’t
default emphasise how much I think inflation credibility
default has helped the 
defaultUK
default economy and
default therefore, by implication, how we nee
defaultd to be on guard, shall we say, 
defaultfor this issue.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ50 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default You are saying here not that we should be on guard, but that something has slipped past our 
defaultguard. You have said they can’t
default raise rates in the run-up to an election. 
defaultSimon Wellsdefault:
default I said I think it is unlikely.
defaultChairdefault:default 
defaultYou said it would be a brave move to tighten policy.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: To tighten pol
defaulticy in April 2015, Mr Chairman. 
defaultI stick by that, yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ51 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default In March?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: The probability decays, but I am sure you can see where I am coming from.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ52 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default I
default can
default see where you are coming from
default;
default I am asking you to be explicit about it
default. 
defaultWe had an election in 2010. We had an election in 2005. Do you think it was equally brave, more brave or less brave to raise rates in March
default,
default or
default whenever it was,
default 2005?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: It
default would have been monumentally brave to have raised rates
default in 2010
default.
defaultChairdefault:default I have moved to 2005
default—
defaultI have moved swiftly on.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I think through the first decade or so of in
defaultflation targeting, by and large
default the going wa
defaults good. The central b
defaultank was unlikely to make decisions that were hugely unpopular, but now there is the 
defaultpotential that we could see 
defaultunemployment come down and we could see the economy take off. It may be that the first rate rise might need to be around that time, but when you put the economics and politics together, the reason I wrote that was because I do feel that it is going to be at least the second half of 2015, maybe 2016, before we see the first rate rise.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ53 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default I am trying to find out whether you are also saying something slightly
default different
default. Are you saying, as you
default put it, we need to be on guard and 
defaultat the moment our guard has been wholly robust and has 
defaultnot been penetrated by anything, 
defaultor are you saying we already ha
defaultve political risk 
defaultor a political pricing element in monetary policy, wh
defaultich we did not have before, and therefore
default monetary policy has been politicised?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: To some extent. It is very much the same as Mr McFadden’s question. While forward guidance was Mr Carney’s big initiative, more monetary activism was certainly being promoted by the Government. You could say that,
default alongside the first remit chang
defaulte, there has been a bit more me
defaultddling than before, but I
default think we need to be on guard that this is not the thin end of the wedge.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ54 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default We also nee
defaultd to be on guard to that
default,
default seeing
default as something has slipped past our guard, which i
defaults what you are now saying. D
defaulto you think that inflationary expectations are more vulnerable now than they were before as a consequence?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Potentially, and for a slig
defaulthtly different reason. 
defaultI think that
default with
default the forward guidance and the remit that asked to be
default more explicit about the growth-inflation trade-off, it seems to me that 
defaultthe Bank of England is willing to trade off a little bit of risk of higher inflation for a little bit less risk of killing off a recovery. In that sense, the inflationary risks have shifted a little bit more to the upside as well.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ55 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Is that
default what you mea
defaultnt, perhaps, at the start—don’t
default let me put 
defaultwords into your mouth
default;
default I know you won’t
default—when you said you thought policy was somewhat looser?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Yes, indeed, policy was somewhat looser, and that obviously feeds through to a higher inflationary risk.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ56 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default That has been a highly tendentious exchange, and I have two smiling people here
default who want to chip in.
defaultJens Larsendefault:
default I am glad you did not ask me
defaultChairdefault:default 
defaultLet’s 
defaultgo to Mr Larsen and 
defaultthen 
defaultMr Wood.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think you look back at the experience the economists went through, but also that you have been through, with the bank. The bank has e
defaultvolved very substantially. The g
defaultovernor is now in charge of microprudential and macroprudential regulation. The toolbox for the
default Bank of England is much bigger
default and the bank now has a much more direct say in the evolution of credit conditions in the 
defaultUK
default. With the size of the 
defaultbalance sheet, 
defaultthe size of 
defaultthe gilt holdings, 
defaultthe decision to repatriate the coupon and so on, it is very clear
default,
default to me at least
default,
default that the overlap between monetary and fiscal policy has become 
defaulta lot stronger, and the overlaps
default between monetary policy, monetary stability and financial sta
defaultbility issues have become 
defaultmuch stronger than they were five or 10 years ago. Monetary policy is conducted in a completely different environment. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ57 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default The point that we were getting towards with Mr Wells is that we made the bank independent so
default that
default the sticky politicians’ fingers could be kept well away from t
defaulthose monetary policy funds. 
defaultI am asking you whether the
defaulty are dangerously close to them
default or whether a careful forensic examination might already find some
default of that
default stickiness on those funds.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I do not think so much stickin
defaultess relative to the election date
default, but political issues will weigh more heavily on a bank that has a much wider remit than one that has a very na
defaultrrow monetary policy focus. The
default delegation that has effectively taken place used to be constrained to monetary policy in a 
defaultvery well defined way. Now the g
defaultovernor and the Bank of England have a much wider remit, which makes it much less easy for them to isolate their mind
defaults
default and take monetary policy decisions in a vacuum. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ58 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default So, g
defaultreater importance for the bank in taking account of this broader perspective, which is an inevitable consequence of their new remit, but no increase in 
defaultthe 
defaultrisk that they are going to get leant on by the politicians?
defaultJens Larsendefault: 
defaultI think “leant 
defaulton
default”
default 
defaultwould be disrespectful to both
default the
default politicia
defaultns and 
defaultthe MPC, but it is obvious
default that you have to be aware of the political context when you have such wide-ranging resp
defaultonsibilities.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ59 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default A f
defaultirst-rate 
defaultdiplomat, if I may say. Mr Wood?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: What is the question?
defaultChair:default 
defaultIt is the same question that I put to Mr Wells. Has this all got a bit politicised by the back door, or not?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: A little bit more, yes. We have had a remit change from the Government this year. We have a strategy where monetary activism
default is part of that. That is right at a
default time when unemployment is very high and the 
defaultUK
default has not really gone anywhere for a couple of ye
defaultars. B
defaultut necessarily
default,
default talking about those things, and given th
defaulte situation in the economy,
default I think it is a little 
defaultbit more politicised. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ60 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default Mr Wells, in a contribution to the Chairman, you referred to Mark Carney, “Actually, his moves provided more monetary activism provided by the Government”. Di
defaultd you mean to say that
default or did I mishear you?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I think it was clear that the Government wanted more monetary activism
default,
default if we go back to the f
defaultirst quarter of this year. W
defaulte can assume that at his interview Mr Carney was supportive of more monetary activism as well, and his idea of monetary activism, as we have said, was this forward guidance intention to keep interest rates lower for longer, which we now have. Although we have discussed the dangers of building a policy around one person, I think it is clear that it is his big initiative so far.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ61 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default T
defaulthat makes it clearer. Carney is supposed to be lucky. Well, he is lucky. He has been a lucky individual; that is clear from his record. Do you think he has run out of luck, coming forward with forward guidance? In other word
defaults, if he had started this month
default rather than in July, do you think he woul
defaultd have brought forward 
defaultforward guidance?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I do not think he has run out of luck particularly. The 
defaultUK
default economy has turned up much quicker than any of us would have expected this year, so the problem that he has—
default&#xa0;
defaultQ62 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default If you leave all that to one side, do you think he would have done forw
defaultard guidance this month with a changed economic atmosphere?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I think there would have been some policy change after the review announced by the Government in March of the monetary policy framework. It would have been very surprising if the Bank of England had concluded that absolutely no change was required, so something would have been done, I am sure.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ63 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default What do you think, Mr Wood?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Yes, I would agree. With all of the run-up through the summer, the public speeches with the commissioning of a review of monetary policy, we would have had some change, whether it be this month or in August. What the run-up
default in the date and
default the strength of data over the summer probably meant is that we had a relatively cautious announcement in terms of an unemployment rate that was at the high end of where people expected. I think that is where the data came in. Either way, I would be pretty sure we would have had some
defaultthing
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ64 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default If he had not brought forward forward guidance, what change would you have seen him take or sugges
defaultt? You are saying there would have been
default some policy changes. What policy changes could he possibly have made? All
default he seems to have done is, with
default a few back doors open, lengthen the area where he has signalled
default to the market and the consumers, “Don’t
default expect interest rates to go up until 2015, 2016”. What else could the Monetary Policy Committee under Carney have done? What is the alternative?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: To be clear, I was trying to say that if this had been the month when the review happened, I think they would have introduced forward guidance this month.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ65 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default 
defaultThey would have introduced it
default regardless?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I
default think so, yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ66 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default So the change in atmosphere does not matter?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: That has affected how aggressi
defaultve this forward guidance is. 
defaultI think the strength of the economy and the 
defaultimprovement in the surveys mean
default we have not had a super-aggressive loosening of policy. We have had a little bit. 
defaultI think we would have also had a little bit this month as well.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ67 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default 
defaultWhen we come near to reaching the 7%, what com
defaultmunication challenges face the g
defaultovernor an
defaultd the MPC? I
defaultn fact you have probably ans
defaultwered it with the last answer. D
defaulto you think that will be a very important sign? They are not saying they are going to raise
default interest rates then, but at that
default time
default they
default will take a close look at it. Do you think that they will introduce fresh guidance at that stage? Will there be a need for it? In other words, have we c
defaulthanged into a different world—f
defaultresh guidance is the policy?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: 
defaultThere i
defaults
default a
default pretty good chance that 
defaultwe get further guidance once we appr
defaultoach 7%
default—w
defaulte
default 
defaultheard as much from deputy g
defaultovernor Charlie Bean yesterda
defaulty in his speech. It is a binary thing
default—
defaulteither you are at 7% or you are not
default—
defaultso
default I think
default there will be
default some furt
defaulther guidance. We have seen the F
defaulted doing these sorts of things as well
default—
defaulttrying to spread out the debate away from just one number, unemployment, towards a number of measures of how the e
defaultconomy is doing. To try to stop
default moving to 7% being the event that
default causes interest rates to rise, 
defaultI think they will probably want to smooth out the trigger point a bit.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ68 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default T
defaulthe old days of the Monetary Policy Committee meeting and deciding whether to raise interest rates or to 
defaultdo more QE have disappeared now.
default They will be 
defaultworking in blocks in the future.
default Does that make sense
default in an economy that is working away pretty 
defaultreasonably? Monetary activism was designed
default to try fresh things. Is that a condemnation of the way the Monetary Polic
defaulty Committee used to work, and 
defaultis 
defaultthis 
defaulttherefore 
defaultthe future?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: They will
default,
default of course
default,
default be meeting every 
defaultmonth
default and they will be talking about whether or not they should raise interest rates, particularly as we approach 7% unemployment. The idea of further guidance is that they might well decide in those discussions that 7% is not the be
default-
defaultall and end
default-
defaultall for whether you raise interest rates, and that would be the point of saying something additional at that time
default—probably, that 7% is not the be-all or end-
defaultall of interest rates. Saying that publicly would be pretty simple. 
defaultIs it a condemnation 
defaultof previous policy? No, I don’t
default think so. We find ourselves in a pr
defaultetty unusual situation. 
defaultOn o
defaultutput
default, 
defaultthe economy is still smaller than it was before the crisis. We now appear to be growing, but we have not done for quite some time, so we probably need to do something a little bit d
defaultifferent in that situation. I don’t
default think it is 
defaulta condemnation.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ69 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default 
defaultMr McFadden 
defaultwas talking to you about whether the MPC has 
defaultchanged its r
defaultole. It is just a personal view
default,
default but I thought it w
defaultas a very clever move
default. Instead 
defaultof Carney being one of nine and
default arguing from basic principles
default—
defaultevery meeting he 
defaultcomes with a decision unknown
default—
defaulth
defaulte has lifted himself out of 
defaultthat and got at least two years
default’
default breathing space
default,
default unless certain things happen, and he has them in the kn
defaultockouts, which I will ask
default you about. Is that a jaundiced view or a cynical view? I always worried about him coming here
default. W
defaulthen he was i
defaultn 
defaultCanada
default,
default 
defaulthe was the top man
default and he t
defaultook the decisions. Coming here as a Canadian and having
default to convinc
defaulte nine 
defaultUK
default citizens that he knew better, 
defaultI thought they were waiting for him. 
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I am not sure whether I can say it is jaundiced or not. I would go back to one of the answers earlier, where there are three caveats to this guidance. If any of the members were particularly worried about inflation picking up, about a big rise in import prices destabilising the economy, they could vote for a rate rise. I do not think—
default&#xa0;
defaultQ70 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default That would kill the whole strategy, would it not?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: It would.
default It would knock it off.
defaultMr Mudie:default If he as the g
defaultovernor is personified and tied up
default with
default 
default“
defaultuntil 7%
default”
default, that would be
default a major revolution, wouldn’
defaultt
default it
default—
defaulta major revolt, you would say
default—
defaultand it would threaten th
defaulte whole structure, wouldn’t it?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: That is why I said in principle it is dangerous to have a policy very closely associated with one person in the institution, so I kind of agree in principle. In practice, of course, we have had a vote against th
defaulte guidance—well, not against it
default,
default but against its specific formulation—right at the start, and we have had a number of speeches and public appearances where different MPC members are giving very different views abo
defaultut how they see the outlook
default. I can definitely see where you are driving
default at. I think it is 
defaulta risk
default in principle
default, but what we are seeing from the members is at least some individual accountability and different views. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ71 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default That is a point. You make a very important point there. Martin We
defaultale was the first, but there are
default clearly some disgruntled people on the Monetary Policy Committee. Now he has locked them into this 
defaultoverarching policy, isn’t there
default a danger that there will be more public disagreements that would cause trouble in terms of messages sent out to the market?
defaultRobert Wooddefault: If the message is, “Interest rates are going to be
default on hold for three years”, 
defaultI think anything that stops that happening is 
defaultproblematic. I know that was the simple message that came 
defaultacross the day after, but
default across all of the talking we have heard over the past couple of months, they have been very careful to say, “We are going to keep interest rates on hold until unemployment falls to 7%. We have all these caveats around inflation
default and financial stability
default”
default—
defaultto
default, I guess,
default 
defaultguard against that risk. Clearly it is a risk when you are trying to communicate
default a
default policy.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ72 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default What about these knockouts? 
defaultThey are clearly back doors, but do they give him too much wriggle room, so as almost to be less useful? 
default[
defaultInterruption.
default]
default Front doors, then—I have no argument with front doors. 
defaultDoes it just not undercut the whole policy that it is this 
default7% in a certain 
defaultyear
default,
default but 
defaultif these three things go wrong
default,
default or one of these three, we can revisit the over
defaultall target? I think one of you—HSBC 
defaultis it—say by your criteria or judgment he has probably failed the first already.
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: If the Bank of England were
default to take my inflation forecast, yes, they would be knocked out already. I am not quite as optimistic.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ73 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default You are too good. Remember, they have not met theirs for four years, so you might get a nomination soon. 
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: The problem is four
default years ago we were probably all doing the bank’s inflation forecast, but anyway. To me, the knockouts are completely within the control of the Bank of England. It is in control of its own inflation forecast. It can decide if it wants to knock itself out or not. Of course, there will be a wide 
defaultrange of views on the committee
default and
default,
default as we approach 7% or inflation takes off, it will become a tense debate, I am sure. 
defaultOn the 
defaultsecond knockout
default—
defaulton the Financial Policy 
defaultCommittee
default and whether it is destabilising to the
default UK financial system
default—
defaultit 
defaultseems like pretty much a last resort that Mark Carney, as chairman of one committee, is going to write a letter to himself
default,
default as chairman of the other committee
default,
default and say, “Your flagship policy is risking financial instability”. I think the FPC will try to use its own tools to prevent that happening. Anyway, the bank is in control of it
default, so r
defaulteally it is only the inflation expectation 
defaultknock
defaultout, which is anyway out of control of the bank, and that is very subjective as to whether the inflation expectations have got out of hand. I think we could all have a long debate to decide whether
default that had happened or not. 
defaultI think there is a lot of wiggle room within those three knockouts.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ74 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default 
defaultOn a different matter, in o
defaultne of y
defaultour papers, your last sentence 
defaultdealing
default with the recovery
default says, “R
defaultecovery is welcome and should continue. However, the 
defaultUK
default needs to look beyond just the quantity of growth and start focusing on the quality”
default. Jeremy Warner said that 
defaultin the 
defaultDaily Telegraph
default 
defaulta couple of weeks back. Can you explain what you meant?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: Yes. If we rewind to 2010, we all hoped that the 
defaultUK
default economy would
default rebalance away from debt-fuelled
default household and Government consumption and become more reliant on investment and trade as the drivers of growth. Unfortunately, after several years of stagn
defaultation, frankly
default I think we are delighted to see any growth at all, but the fact is, along the dimensions that the 
defaultUK
default economy needed to rebalance, if anything
default,
default it has got more unbalanced, so we are more reliant on household consumption and less on investment. The current account deficit in the 
defaultUK
default last year was the widest since 1989. Therefore, we are more unbalanced externally than we were in 2007. As for the relative shift from services to manufacturing, services output has recovered above its pre-crisis level. Manufacturing output
default is still 10% below. This can’t
default get us away from the fact that, fundamentally, in order to avoid mistakes of the past, the economy s
defaulttill needs to rebalance. It
default is great that we are finally growing again, but we still need to rebalance and look at the composition of growth as well.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ75 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default 
defaultY
defaultou have missed out, aga
defaultin, a growing dependence on 
defaultCity salaries and taxation 
defaultthat is starting to reappear. 
defaultI have struggled in this Committee over the last three years to get somebody to explain how we are actively going to get that rebalancing. Do you see signs
default that
default I am missing?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: To take the external rebalancing towards trade and towards goods and manufacturing as one ex
defaultample, on reflection
default,
default it was rather naive to think that because sterling had depreciated by 25% in 2008 we were going to go back into factories that had lai
defaultn
default idle for a decade and switch the lights back on. While our macro textbooks would tell us the competitiveness from the sterling depreciation would have been useful, there is perhaps some evidence, particularly in manufacturing, that there is a bit of a skills shortage. Certainly, survey measures of spare capacity and labour shortages are far more acute in manufacturing that in servic
defaultes. These sorts of things can’t
default just be fixed overnight. Training people takes a long time. 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ76 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default Three years is not o
defaultvernight, is it? We accept the g
defaultovernor of the Bank of England said it was imperative we rebalanced. For three years we appear to be recovering in the same areas where we regretted before the recession. What do you say, Mr Wood? You do not have to say anything. 
defaultRobert Wooddefault: We are recovering in the areas that we regretted before the recession. The one thing I would add to the point about it taking three years is
default that
default of course we had a very difficult period for the world economy
default—
defaultwho
default,
default ultimately
default,
default we are going to try to sell these things to
default?—
defaultin
default 
defaultthe meantime. I think that probably slows things down. 2009, 2011 and 2012 were probably not the best times to open up or turn on the lights in an old factory, to take Simon’s phrase. I totally ag
defaultree with the point.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ77 default&#xa0; 
defaultMr Mudie:default Those three years should have been used. You are right that the markets were not
default there overseas
default and Europe had the
defaultir
default problems, but those were the years we should have been putting the infrastructure into place so that when the markets came back we were poised and we had the supply ready, whereas it does not look as though 
defaultfrom 
defaultyour figures, Mr Wells,
default that
default it is responding.
defaultJens Larsendefault: The monetary policies we have put in place have been
default supportive of demand and can’t
default do much to achieve the rebalancing, other than if you see monetary policy as underpinning a very weak exchange rate. Where we have
default made progress
default in the Bank 
defaultof England’s area 
defaultis on financial regulation
default where, even if it is not yet seen in the way you want, you have certain
defaultly seen a different City 
defaultand a different set of regulatory approaches emerge from all that has been done. Rebalancing is happening. If you want a stronger manufacturing sector, then you have to do what many European countries are struggling to do, which is to improve compet
defaultiveness in those sectors. F
defaultirst and foremost
default, that
default 
defaultmeans improve productivity
default—
defaultthat is
default,
default improving skills. That is more than a three-year job, but you are right, we had better get started.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ78 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default I 
defaultwant to end by coming back to these knockouts. Of course, one of th
defaulte knockouts only kicks in at 2.5
default% inflation
default rather than 2%. Is that in itself a signal for a new policy?
defaultJens Larsendefault: No, because it kicks in ear
defaultlier. O
defaultf course, this is where there wa
defaults disagreement of the committee. By shortening the horizon
default,
default 
defaultI think there is a better chance that an inflation shock now
default,
default of the kind that we discussed earlier
default,
default will still impact the forecast. If you go to a two or three-year horizon, most of that shock will have washed through and inflation will almost invariably be either at or very close to the target.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ79 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default So t
defaulthat is a tighte
defaultning?
defaultJens Larsendefault: I think that is very carefully calibrated so as not to constitute very much of a tightening, but that is wher
defaulte the balance and judgment lies, I guess.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ80 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Where does it lie?
defaultJens Larsendefault: Martin would have seen it. Martin Weale would have wanted it earlier. In that sense, I think it would have made the framework tighter and made that very small loosening we talked about smaller still.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ81 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Is this
default 2.5%
default a loos
defaultening or a tightening
default?
defaultJens Larsendefault: 2.5% as it stands and where we are, I do not think it makes a big difference.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ82 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Bang on the button?
defaultJens Larsendefault: More or less. U
defaultnlike Simon, I am a little more optimistic on inflation. 
defaultRobert Wooddefault: I do not think it makes a big difference. To return to where I started, guidance more or less describes what the Bank of England was already doing. After all, we have not had inflation below target for quite some time, so we have been tolerating faster price ri
defaultses to support the economy. Two and a half, two years ahead
default,
default 
defaultthey very 
defaultrarely forecast that to happen
default,
default so 
defaultI do not think it is a significant tightening.
default 
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: I agr
defaultee. It is a probabilistic thing
default anyway. It only has to be the probability of it being above 2.5%, so the central case could be well below that, but it gives them a lot of parameters to play with. They can widen the 
defaultuncertainty. They can change the
default skew around inflation. There are a lot of tools they can use to control that knockout, I think.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ83 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default Taking all three, they are pretty front-door routes out of what was initially announced or appea
defaultred to be an announcement about
default,
default if not a straitjacket, 
defaultthen 
defaultcertainly a much more rigorous framework to limit scope for an early rise in rates. 
defaultOne more question. Do you think that, to any degree, the fact that we have had a new remit—
defaultand of course
default we have this new forward guidance—tarnishes the credibility of monetary p
defaultolicy, which is very hard-won, 
defaultthe core part of the credibility that enables downward pressure to be brought to bea
defaultr on inflationary expectations?
defaultSimon Wellsdefault: In theory, no. I think the bank has set out this framework deliberately to try to test the limits of growth without compromisin
defaultg price stability
default,
default but 
defaultas the afternoon’s discussions have indicated, there is potential for the wiggle room within the str
defaultict knockouts to allow it. 
defaultI think that the choice has been to allow a bit more risk of inflation for a smaller risk of recovery.
defaultRobert Wooddefault: Not dramatically. I do not think it dramatically changes it. Ultimately, the remit still says the key target or goal of monetary policy is stable inflation at 2%. It adds a lot of riders and addi
defaulttional things subsequently
default—v
defaultolatility of output is one. No dramatic change, but I do agree with Simon’s sentiment that it probably makes a small change in that direction by adding that additional test.
defaultJens Larsendefault: I do not think a remit review was necessary. I do not think the remit change has added
default very much, and 
defaultin general one should be averse to reviewing the remit too often because it does feel as if it could be changed for non-good reasons. I do not think
default I would have done it. T
defaulthe MPC has demonstrated
default that
default under the old remit they had plenty of flexibility to do what they thought was necessary anyway.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ84 default&#xa0; 
defaultChairdefault:default All things being equal,
default it
default will have tarnished the credibility
default at the margin
default?
defaultJens Larsendefault: On the margin, but because the 
defaultchange was small, it is
default not a big deal. It was certainly a discussion point in
default the first quarter of this year,
default when we were still talking about very high inflation, what this remit revie
defaultw was going to lead to and whether
default a pot
defaultential change to 
defaulta
default nominal GDP target 
defaultwould have changed monetary policy fundamentally.
defaultChairdefault:default Thank you very much for coming today. If you think we have asked you the wrong questions this afternoon, then put on paper what we should have asked and give us the answers
default, and we will be very happy to see those as well.
default Thank you very much for coming.
default