&#xa0;
defaultRathbone—Written EvidencedefaultHouse of Lords 
defaultInquiry into 
defaultEU 
defaultYouth Unemployment
default&#xa0;
defaultRathbone believe
defaults
default th
defaulte
default 
defaultnew 
defaultEU action to tackle youth unemployment does respe
defaultct individual Member States powers in the areas of social and employment affairs. 
defaultI
defaultndividual states are able to provide any additional 
defaultnecessary 
defaultinterventions
default, providing measures and
default restrictions to EU initiatives
default. They can
default ensure that these are consistent 
defaultwith 
defaultand can be accommodated 
defaultwithin
default 
defaultnational 
defaultand
default regional 
defaulteconomic and social conditions
default, f
defaultor example, taking account of the difference between rural and urban economies and social conditions.
defaultWe
default further believe the
default proble
defaultm of youth unemployment
default across the EU
default is so great
default today
default that there is the 
defaultpotenti
defaultal 
defaultfor serious social 
defaultand economic 
defaultconsequences of not addressing the situation
default.
default The economic productivity of Member States is based on having a skilled and flexible workforce
default. Long term youth unemployment reduces competitive advantage and increases welfare dependency with associated poor health impacts.  
default.
default Many Member States are struggling with wider economic conditions and without EU support would
default not be able to tackle the
default is
defaultsue
default of youth unemployment
default without 
defaultcross bord
defaulter transnational interventions.
defaultWe would also like to make the point that the 6 
defaultB
defaultillion 
defaultE
defaulturos that has been 
defaultcommitted
default to tackle youth unemployment
default via the YEI
default is a very low amount
default of
default funding in comparison to the problem,
default r
defaultepresenting around 850 
defaultE
defaulturos per individual young unemployed person
default.
defaultRathbone
default recommend that it is the Member State which i
defaults asked to provide any ma
defaulttch funding required for
default programmes rather than individual organisations
default and 
defaultservice delivery is then publically procured. 
default Moreover, that a differentiated approach is adopted in the allocation of funding to better reflect Member S
defaulttates particular economic and social conditions. It is further recommended that a differentiated approach is applied more vigorously within countries receiving funding. 
defaultFurthermore, the restrictions of YEI funds to those Member States with
default youth unemploym
defaultent above 25%
default signif
defaulticantly
default disadvant
defaultages
default those nations who have pockets
default of youth unemployment above 25% for example Ireland, UK, Netherlands
default but
default where 
default the national percen
defaulttage is below the 25% threshold making it ineligible for YEI funding. We agree and s
defaulttrongly support the introduction of 
defaultEU 
defaultYo
defaultuth Action Teams to instruct and support Member States to reprofile their European Structural Funds towards reducing youth unemploymen
defaultt. There is an obvious problem when
default collectively EU Member States are currently s
defaultpending more on subsidies for cows than on initiatives to reduce youth unemployment.  
defaultThe priority now needs to be the implementation of the YEI 
defaultprogramme and wider ESF initiatives as the need
defaults
default of young people who are unemployed, som
defaulte for many
default years now are becoming more pressing.
default In summary, to ensure success there needs to be a greater effort to ensure all the interventions are joined up as a com
defaultprehensive action plan
default.
default Overarching coordination is vital if we are to avoid a piecemeal approach. Solving youth unemployment cannot be achieved with isolated interventions; these need to include addressing wider policy issues such as education, 
defaultsocial wel
defaultfare and mobility for young people.
default30 October 2013
default&#xa0;
default Work Foundation Research Paper June 2012 ‘Short Term Crisis – Long Term Problem”
default