&#xa0;
defaultCST0003default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence fromdefault Peter Barrondefault(Rdefaultetired Det. Chief Superintendent Metropolitan Policedefault &amp; Head of TP Crime Recordingdefault)default1.    defaultIntroductiondefaultAlthough the Public Administration Select Committee is only consid
defaultering ‘crime statistics’, it is 
defaultimpossible to understand the true situation without also considering ‘incident data’. I
defaultn many cases, calls 
defaultfrom members of the public are initi
defaultally recorded as ‘incidents’ only
default some 
defaultof which are 
defaultlater recorded as crimes. It is this ‘cradle-to-grave’ process that provides opportunities to influence 
defaultif/when incidents are
default recorded as crimes – and of those that are recorded as such – the specific type of crime that is recorded.
default This report discusses;
default2.
default              
defaultWhy police indent and crime data is important
default3.
default              
defaultPast and present audit regimes
default4.
default              
defaultThe incident-to-
defaultcrime continuum
default5.
default              
defaultForce Incident and Force Crime Registrars
default6.
default              
defaultHow to
default cheat
default7.
default              
defaultThe British Crime Survey
default8.
default              
defaultConclusions
default2. default              defaultWhy is police incident and crime defaultdata important?defaultPublic &amp; Officer SafetydefaultIf you cannot fully understand the risks presented by the number
default/type
default of 
defaultincidents 
defaultor 
defaultcrime
defaults 
defaultbein
defaultg committed – then how 
defaultcan you 
defaultaccurately 
defaultassess the risk
default(s)
default to both the public and the officers patrolling that area?
defaultIntelligence lead policingdefaultThis is a phrase often used to explain how police target certain groups or areas and it can be exceptionally effective. However, 
defaultit is also true that if you fail
default to include 
defaultall of the data or
default, you include data that 
defaultyou know to be inaccurate, 
defaultyour results will be
default flawed and skewed as a result.
defaultIt is the basis of majority of crime performance measuresdefaultThe police performance landscape has (quite rightly) changed over the years, but perhaps the easiest way of understanding how this can affect policing is
default to read a very 
default insightful
default book by Steven D Levitt and Stephen J 
defaultDubner
default ‘
defaultFreakonomics
default’ 
defaultOne of their
default key
default 
defaultconclusions is that
default&#xa0;
default‘people respond to incentives’
default&#xa0;
default. Perverse incentives such as the performance-related pay of ACPO officers to ‘reduce recorded crime’ might inadvertently encourage fewer crimes to be 
defaultrecorded
default by officers although the number of victims is not actually reduced. As you will see this has a serious effect on the quality of service provided to victims of crime and in the long-term has a serious and detrimen
defaulttal effect on public confidence.
defaultPolice &amp; Crime Commissioners - holding Chief Officers to accountdefaultThis 
defaultrepresents a 
defaultsea change
default in policing and accountability
default. Notwithstanding the
default low level of turno
defaultut at the recent elections, PCCs
default are now in office and represent a real opportunity to guarantee greater accountability.
defaultIt might be prudent at this point to remember that 
defaultit can often be advantageous to present 
defaultpol
defaultice performance as something overly
default comp
defaultlex. The national police landscape is changing 
defaultand if the future were to include reducing the number of forces and decreasing the number of Chief Officers then it is quite understandable that they would want to present themselves in the most flattering light.
default&#xa0;
defaultSurviv
defaultal is a very powerful incentive.
defaultAccountabilitydefault and defaultvulnerabilitydefaultPolice a
defaultnd Crime Panels (PCPs) have been
default introduced in each force area to examine the actions and decisions of their respective PCC. Whilst the PCC holds the Chief Officer to account – the PCP supports and challenges the work of the PCC.
defaultOnce again, they are reliant upon the accuracy of the data – and the risks it identifies. If either the data and/or the analysis are flawed then the assessment of risk cannot be accurate and they will be unable to discharge their function(s) effectively.
default Whilst every tragedy
default offers opportunity to ‘learn lessons’ it may not be long before prosecutions are brought against Chief Officers and PCCs under the Corporate
default Manslaughter and Corporate Homicide Act 2007 in relation to their failing to ensure that effective policies and procedures are in place to prevent a death. Failing to ensure accurate information is made available to officers and the public is an obvious vulnerability given the results of so many previous audits.
defaultThe difference between these two figures is often referred to as
default&#xa0;
default‘the dark figure of unrecorded crime’default&#xa0;
defaultand it can represent a significant number of victims. Not only can this lull the public (and PCCs and PCPs) into thinking that crime is falling when it may not be – it also means that those victims whose crimes are recorded as something ot
defaulther than a crime (e.g. lost property
default) are not dealt with in accordance with the Victims Charter where victims of crime receive a prescribed response to assist them to deal with the trauma of their crime.
defaultUnderstanding the totality and nature of demanddefaultIt is often suggested that 70% of police activity relates to non-crime issues and only 30% is directly related to crime. The nature of policing is changing and each police service will have differing demands placed upon it, however, unless there exists an accurate understanding of what that demand actually consists of – then there is little hope of having the appropriate resources in the right place at the right time to meet that demand.
default&#xa0;defaultPreventing Critical IncidentsdefaultThis knowledge of the totality of demand extends to preventing critical incidents by identifying pre-cursor events that when looked at as a series or a pattern, provide an insight that the situation may be deteriorating and present opportunities to intervene – and potentially save lives.
default 
defaultThere is no shortage of high-profile news stories that highlight the fact that police had been aware of the situation at a certain address for a number of weeks/months/years. The numerous calls had been logged and most (if not all) of the crimes may have been recorded, howev
defaulter, nobody 
default‘joined-up-the-dots’ to reveal that th
defaultings were deteriorating
default until the day things got out of hand, resulting in a tragedy.
defaultValue for MoneydefaultU
defaultnless you understand the true picture of performance, you are denied the opportunity of bei
defaultng able to agree a baseline, 
defaultmake improvements upon it and demonstrate how you are providing greater value for money.
defaultFew would be convinced that recording the crime of theft by pickpocketing as ‘lost property’ would be a sensible approach – nor would recording attempted burglary (where the suspect has attempted to force a window with a crowbar) as ‘Criminal Damage to a dwelling’. Inaccurately recording crimes does not present value for money.
defaultConversely, accurate crime recording allows you to understand the true situation and then put str
defaultategies in place (e.g. PCCs Policing Plan
default) to improve things. If you don’t agree, consider this; Two patients go to see their doctor. One tells him exactly what the symptoms are and gives a full account of how he is affected. The other fails to tell him about some symptoms altogether and only describes other symptoms as less serious than they really are. Which of the two patients stands a better chance of being cured?
defaultProductivitydefaultA term often used in industry and 
defaultis now increasingly being used
default withi
defaultn the police service. It 
defaultcan consider things such as how many officers/staff are emp
defaultloye
defaultd on ‘front line’ duties compared with
default how many perform ‘back-office’ functions. Both are essential but it is the proportions
default that are important at a force
default-level.
defaultIt is also clear that demographics have a part to play. Areas and populations change and so t
defaultheir demands change too. Is the
default police service responsive to those demands or is there a formula used to decide levels of policing that has not changed for years? Are some officers and police staff horribly overworked, whilst other are comparatively under
default-employed? Do some areas of the
default police service appear to perform well because of their resources – or in spite of them??
defaultDetermining local policing prioritiesdefaultSetting local priorities will be determined by a number of issues – not least of which must be the views of constituents, however, there must also be an understanding of the (accurate) levels of priority crimes and Anti Social Behaviour (ASB). The importance of accurate crime recording is rehearsed above so I shall not repeat it here.
defaultStrategic &amp; tacticdefaultal planningdefaultThe only way in which a PCC or PCP will be able to determine success against the Policing Plan will be if there is an accurate picture of crime to begin with. It may be that the only way to do this is to ensure that things are being done in accordance with the Home Office Counting Rules (HOCR) 
defaultthe National Standard of Incident Recording (NSIR) 
defaultand the National Standard of Crime Recording (NCRS)
default3.default              defaultPast and present audit regimesdefaultT
defaulthe audit regime
default(s) that examined incident and crime data has steadily reduced
default over the years
default, possibly influenced by ACPO who vi
defaultew the standards described above
default as an 
default‘
defaultunnecessary bureaucracy
default’ rather than the essential
default checks and balances that support good governance and ethical crime recording. Requests under the Freedom of Information Act for the action taken (or not) by forces in response to ‘Areas of Improvement’ identified by audit
defaults
default might prove both interesting and embarrassing in equal measure.
defaultThe emergence of PCCs has added a new dimension; 
defaultthe
default very public spat between the PCC for Gwent and his Chief Constable (that resulted in her departure) appears to be rooted in the accuracy of crime recording in that 
defaultparticular 
defaultforce. I’m confident that other PCCs will now be facing something of a dilemma; 
defaultdo
default they accept without reservation what 
defaulttheir ACPO team regarding crime performance tells them
default, or do they offer
default a chal
defaultlenge? Unfortunately few are ex-
defaultPolice Officers (
defaultNBdefault 
defaultthe PCC for Gwent is an ex Detective Superintendent) and so may be in danger of (a) being in awe of senior Police Officers who have previously ‘ruled’ without challenge
default (b) lacking the necessary expertise to ask sufficiently 
defaultincisive and 
defaultdetailed questions to illicit
default a genuinely informative
default response.
default4. default              defaultThe incident-to-defaultcrime continuumdefaultI
defaultncidents reported to PolicedefaultPolice are informed of ‘incidents’ by a variety of means – by telephone, in person, by letter, via email etc. Rather predictably, most come in via telephone and callers are answered by either police staff or police officers – usually in call-centre type set ups. Obviously each force has its own communications 
defaultarrangements;
default however, this is 
defaultusually where the NSIR
default comes into play. After listening to the caller, the call-taker has to decide (on the information provided) which category the incident reported best fits into. The current categories are; Transport, Anti-Social Behaviour, Public Safety &amp; Welfare and Administration.
defaultA simple way of hiding incidents that allege crimes is to 'hide' them in another category (Anti Social Behaviour is a 
defaultfirm 
defaultfavourite). By doing so, any audit is much less likely to find them and so conclude that the force has in fact failed to record thousands of crimes. If you are to believe the eminent criminologists, it is these types of issue that can seriously erode the quality of life for victims and escalate into something much more serious. 
defaultThe PASC is advised to take a close look at Anti Social Behaviour recorded on force incident recording systems - they are VERY likely to contain a large number of unrecorded crimes.defaultCrime recording is the domain of the Force Crime Registrar 
default(FCR) 
defaultwhilst incident recording is that of the Force Incident Registrar (FIR). If the incident appears to relate to a crime ‘I’ve just seen two guys breaking into a car’ then the call-taker should create this as a ‘Crime-Related Incident’ (CRI) to identify this as a potential crime that 
defaultmay require
default recording. One of the regular audits carried out by forces is the difference between those crimes opened as a CRI but not resulted with a crime being recorded as you might expect. These audits have been conducted both internally and externally for a number of years and make interesting reading.
defaultIt is obvious that those victims who do not have their incident recorded as a crime receive an entirely different service to those that do. The service promised to vi
defaultctims is often enshrined in the
default force’s ‘Victim’s Charter’.
defaultWhether and When to record as a crimedefaultAn incident will be recorded as a crime if on the balance of probabilities, the circumstances as reported amount to a crime defined by law AND there is no credible evidence to the contrary. What this means is; is the incident more likely than not the result of a criminal act? In most cases the belief by the victim (or a person reasonably assumed to be acting on behalf of the victim) that a crime has occurred is sufficient to justify its recording.
defaultIf a victim is asked if it is
default&#xa0;
defaultpossible
default&#xa0;
defaultthat the wallet fell out of his deep inside pocket on his zipped jacket – he may say that it would be possible if he did cartwheels downhill – but as he did not – the crime of theft (pickpocketing) should be recorded rather than recording the incident as ‘l
defaultost property’. I
defaultf the incident is not recorded as a crime in the first place then that clearly makes it much easier to show a potential reduction in 
defaultthe number of 
defaultcrime
defaults recorded
default. The number of actual victims remains the same – the only real difference is that the victim who had their crime recorded as Lost Property is denied the attention assured under the Victims Charter. Some victims just assume that their loss has been recorded as a crime – that may not always be the case. Lost property registers teem with unrecorded crimes.
defaultClassification of CrimesdefaultOnce a decision has been made to record a crime the specific type of crime chosen should be determined by applying the Home Office Counting Rules (HOCR) given the information available at the time of recording e.g. is it a Theft or a Burglary. At this point it is probably worth pausing and considering the importance of the type of crime being recorded. Certain crimes are also identifi
defaulted as ‘priority crimes’
default. Reducing priority crime is always difficult (catching a burglar in the act is very rare indeed and best left to television drama) but crimes such as Residential Burglary and Robbery (often referred to as ‘mugging’) are both very traumatic to victims. Faced with the prospect of reducing the number of this type of crime is a very daunting prospect. Careers have taken off (and crashed and burned!) on the success, or otherwise, of these attempts. One method that the more unscrupulous might employ is this; faced with 
defaulthaving
default to record a crime – a decision is taken to record a less serious crime than the one alleged. If we believed certain crime records we could be forgiven for thinking there was a group of particular individuals so intent on damaging sash windows with a chisel, they 
defaultare willing to scale scaffolding, climb drainpipes, and risk life and limb purely to inflict damage on softwood and paintwork. Unsurprisingly, Criminal
default Damage is not a priority crime.
defaultAnother example might be recording ‘Theft’ rather than ‘Robbery’. The latter depends upon force being used – or at least the threat of it – in order to commit the offence. Looking at the number of recorded thefts where an injury to the victim is recorded might prove interesting. These types of crime are sometimes referred to as ‘leakage crimes’ i.e. they have leaked out of one type of crime classification into another.
defaultPriority Crime Intervention Teams/GatekeepersdefaultGiven the potential abuse of mobile phone insurance policies (false claims made to get a new phone) it is reasonable that 
defaultsome
default questions are asked of certain victims to verify their allegations. However, it is quite possible that some of these teams/gatekeepers have undergone ‘mission creep’ and their roles have expanded
default into something quite different.
default Rather than challenge those who appear to be making a false allegation (based upon something substantial e.g. the location of the offence is covered by CCTV but nothing remotely matching their version of 
defaultevents was recorded) they 
defaultoften ring back victims and begin to challenge whether or not the crime actually occ
defaulturred or
default by attempting to persuade the victim that a less serious crime than that originally alleged has been committed e.g. challenging whether or not
default force 
defaultwas used during a street robbery. If the victim shows any sign of deviating from their story the crime is often ‘downgraded’ to a simple theft – which is NOT a priority crime. Result; Robbery statistics are reduced.
defaultNo-CrimingdefaultThis is the method via which crimes that have been recorded as crimes are then ‘cancelled’ out. The HOCR provides a strict set of criteria for allowing police to do this;
default• The crime was committed outside of the jurisdiction police force in which it was recorded (i.e. transferred to another force and no-crimed in the original force so it doesn’t ‘count’ against their figures)
default• Following the report of an incident which has subsequently been recorded as a crime, additional verifiable information is available which determines that no notifiable crime has been committed (e.g. man seen climbing through a window by a neighbour – police are called and report a residential burglary – however this was subsequently discovered to be the householder who had forgotten their key)
default• 
defaultthe
default crime as alleged constitutes part of a crime already recorded.
default• 
defaultif
default the reported incident was recorded as a crime in error.
default• 
defaultthe
default crime was one of Fraud by misrepresentation but the offender has been dealt with already.
defaultYou may not be surprised to hear that many crimes are ‘no-crimed’ outside of these criteria thereby not only ‘cancelling’ crimes (including serious crimes such as Rape) which artificially reduces crime figures – but much more importantly – denies victims the aftercare and attention they would receive during an appropriate investigation.
default5. defaultForcedefault Incident defaultand Crime defaultRegistrarsdefaultThe FIR and FC
defaultR could be described as the conscience of the Chief Constable. They identify issues that might impact upon the ethics and accuracy of crime and incident recording. 
defaultThey should (according to Home Office guidance) be the final arbiters regarding incident and crime recording –
default many are regularly over-
defaultruled by their ACPO team.
defaultVery few work directly to their Chief Constable 
default(or PCC
default) 
defaultand most have a number of line managers between them and the chief officer. I’m sure that this is not an effort to provide plausible deniability
default.
default 
default6.default              defaultHow would I cheat?default• Only record a crime if I had
default to.
default• If I have to record a crime – record the least serious crime possible.
default• If I can ‘cancel’
default (no-crime) the crime – 
defaultdo so.
default7.default              defaultThe British Crime SurveydefaultThe Home Office asserts that the BCS can provide a better reflection of the true level of crime than police statistics since it includes crimes that have not been reported to, or recorded by, the police. The Home Office also claims that it measures crime more accurately than Police statistics since it captures crimes that people may not bother to report because they think the crime was too trivial or the police couldn't do much about it. The BCS also provides a better measure of trends over time since it has adopted a consistent methodology and is unaffected by changes in reporting or recording practices. (Wikipedia)
defaultUntil recently the British Crime Survey and Police Recorded Crime followed roughly the sam
defaulte trajectory, however,
default they
default now 
defaultappear to have parted company.
defaultThe BCS shows crime increasing whilst manydefault forces show it decreasing (?)default8.default              defaultConclusionsdefaultOctober 2013
default&#xa0;
default