PUB0007default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from Daphne defaultHavercroftdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultIntroductiondefault&#xa0;defaultMy name is Mrs Daphne 
defaultHavercroft
default. I am a resident of South Gloucestershire. I have seven years experience as a member of the public participating in and 
defaultobserving
default public and patient involveme
defaultnt in local NHS service changes. I have also contributed to 
defaultand o
defaultbserved 
defaultlocal health authority scrutiny of these matters. 
defaultI am a public member of University Hospitals Bristol NHS Foundation Trust. 
defaultI am providing this evidence in a personal capacity.
default&#xa0;
defaultEvidencedefault&#xa0;defaultMy reason for giving evidence to the Committee is that ther
defaulte is an assumption in the Open Public Services White Paper that people know better than politicians and that giving the people more control over services they receive will lead to better pub
defaultlic services. This assumption needs to be thoroughly tested. Unles
defaults 
defaults
defaulttrong governance policies are in place 
defaultat local level 
defaultand audited
default to e
defaultnsure that
default they truly deliver
default full openness and 
defaulttransparency
default,
default 
defaultincreased 
defaultdelegation of powers and responsibility to local level has the potential to do more harm than good.
default&#xa0;defaultI have answered some of the 
defaultCommittee’s 
defaultconsultation questions below and given examples as evidence to support the answers.
default&#xa0;
defaultTo what extent is the Government’s public service reform programmedefault defaultsucceeding in:default&#xa0;defaulta. Empowering citizens?defaultb. Improving public servdefaultices?defaultc. Ensuring that public services are accountable to the people who use them, and to elected officials?default&#xa0;defaultCurrently citizens are not empowered and never will be unless 
defaultorganisations providing public s
defaultervice
defaults
default 
defaultare seen to be 
defaulttruly accountable 
defaultto
default the public
default. 
defaultCurrently l
defaultocal organisations providing public services have the freedom to avoid public accountability
default with impunity
default if they wish to do
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat are the challenges and opportunities in moving power awaydefault defaultfrom Whitehall and into the hands of citidefaultzens?default&#xa0;defaultThe challenge is
default to genuinely move 
defaultpower into the hands of citizens
default. 
defaultThere is an assumption that all citizens want it. I am not convinced this is a correct assumption because empowerment carries respon
defaultsibility which requires citizens to commit time 
defaultto exercise their rights. Many may not be willing to allocate time to this. Consequently there is a risk 
defaultthat power 
defaultwill move
default to
default organisations and groups which claim to represent 
defaultlocal interests and serve the public 
defaultbut in fact may 
defaultnot do so. 
default&#xa0;defaultHow defaultsuccessful have the Government’s reforms been in opening updefault defaultpublic services defaultto grassroots community groups, rather than to largedefault defaultprivate or third sector organisations?default&#xa0;defaultI have not seen any clear evidence of local success, rather the reverse. For example th
defaulte Councils of Bristol, North Somerset, South Gloucestershire and Bath and North East Somerset have awarded contracts to run local 
defaultHealthwatch
default to a third sector organisation which has a history of winning contracts 
defaultwith them. 
defaultThere is no publicly available 
defaultinformation 
defaultto explain 
defaultthe 
defaultgovernance arrangements for
default local 
defaultHeal
defaultthwat
defaultch
default, including arrangements for 
defaultpatient
default and public
default 
defaultpart
defaulti
defaultcipa
defaulttion
default in meetings and 
defaultan explanation as to 
defaulthow the business of the meetings 
defaultwill be recorded
default and published
default. 
defaultOver s
defaultix months 
defaultafter it was established, n
defaulto information is publicly available to show whether any grassroots community groups are part of Local 
defaultHealthwatch
default.
default&#xa0;defaultHow does the Government ensure that public services develop the right kind of leadership as they become more defaultopen, more subject to scrutiny and more customer-focused?default&#xa0;defaultA considerable 
defaultamount of documentation 
defaultexists 
defaultwhich describes good 
defaultleadership 
defaultpractice – for example Nolan Standards, Code of Conduct for NHS Managers, Centre for Public
default Scrutiny Documents
default. There a
defaultre many examples where these practices are not followed
default locally, 
defaultto the detriment o
defaultf openness, and public scrutiny and accountability. 
default&#xa0;defaultFor example 
defaultNHS Foundation Trusts can be completel
defaulty unaccountable to local people
default if they choose to be.
default defaultIn the case of 
defaultthe Foundation Trust of which I am a public member, i
defaultt is impossible to contact the public and patient governors without going through the Trust. It is impossible to have meetings and conversations with public and patient governors without them being chape
defaultroned by the Trust Board Secretary. The Trust Board Chair (as is the statutory role of all Foundation Trust Chairs) also chairs the Governors' Membership Council, thereby having the opportunity to control and influence its meeting agendas and discussions. 
defaultConsequently the extent to which a Foundation Trust Board holds itself accountable to patients and the public depends entirely on the extent to which it chooses to do so.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultAnother example is 
defaultan organisation set up in Bristol, described as
default a dynamic collab
defaultoration between six 
defaultNHS organisations serving the area, the city’s two universities and its local authority. It aims to 
defaultgenerate significant health gain and improvements in service delivery in Bristol by integrating, promoting and developing Bristol's stre
defaultngths in health services, research, innovation and education.
default It is inspired by 
defaultthe success of similar collaborations in the USA, Europe and East Asia
default. It aspires to c
defaultloser working with patients, the public and communities. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI
defaultn response to an FOI request 
defaultit said its Board meetings are held eve
defaultry two months, are not open to 
defaultthe public and the minutes are not published. 
defaultIt has significant opportunity to influence the health and wellbeing of local people, yet 
defaultit is not constituted and governed in any way whic
defaulth would give citizens real empowerment a
defaultnd scrutiny of how well the partnership services the local population and the extent to which it provides value for public money. 
defaultCitizens should have a say in the qualities required of people appointed to leadershi
defaultp roles. Where appropriate, applicants for the roles should be required to hold appropriate professional qualifications as a condition of appointment. To serve citizens properly, 
defaultleaders must be appointed based not on who they know, but what they know and 
defaulthow well they perform as leaders. 
default&#xa0;defaultHow realistic is it that “choice” can be exercised in public servicedefault defaultprovision or should we be looking instead at greater control by usersdefault defaultso they can ensure that public services become more responsive todefault defaultchanging needs?default&#xa0;defaultIf users see evidence that 
defaultproviders of public services are open and accountable, the
defaulty are
default less likely they are to 
defaultdemand more choice. 
defaultHowever t
defaulthere is a long way to go before users have the control intended by Open Services White Paper. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHow do we makedefault sure that all citizens are able to influencedefault defaultpublic services?default&#xa0;defaultOrganisations which offer public services must be required to commit to delivering minimum s
defaulttandards of governance. Their success in meeting those standards 
defaultmust be externally and
default independently audited. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOrganisations must have policies in place to demonstrate that all citizens can influence their servi
defaultces. 
defaultThey must provide citizens with evidence
default that they follow these policies. 
defaultThe sort of behaviours used by
default some 
defaultservice provide
defaultrs try to obstruct citizens
default’ rights
default to influence services are as follows:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWhat safeguardsdefault should be in place to deal with service providersdefault defaultwho fail to deliver services, or who deliver services of an insufficientdefault defaultquality?default default&#xa0;defaultThey should be served with improvement notices. If they fail to improve, sanctions should 
defaultbe applied,
default including contract 
defaulttermination
default if necessary. 
default&#xa0;defaultHow do we ensure that best practice isdefault shared so it can be replicated defaultin the context of greater diversity of provision?default&#xa0;defaultD
defaultefine and 
defaultagree what “best practice”
default means
default, then gather case studies
default defaultwhich demonstrate best practice which
default can be used as a resource for citizens, local public
default defaultservice commissioners and providers. 
default&#xa0;defaultWhat progress has been made in setting up defaultmutualsdefault as an effectivedefault defaultway of delivering public services?default&#xa0;defaultIt is assumed that 
defaultthey will act in the best interests of the public. 
defaultThere is a risk that they will not. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSummary default&#xa0;defaultThe principle of 
defaultgiving
default 
defaultmore power to cit
defaultizens good, but I am not convinced that the majority of citizens want it and have the time to devote to it. M
defaulty experience is that the culture and leadership of some organisations which have responsibility for public services is nowhere near sufficiently de
defaultveloped to provide genuine transparency, openness and public accoun
defaulttability. 
defaultO
defaultrganisations such as 
defaultmutuals
default, 
defaultwhich are not subject to the 
defaultFOIA
default, 
defaultare 
defaulttaking over responsibility for services which were prev
defaultiously managed by public bodies
default which were subject to 
defaultthe FOIA.
default 
defaultThis is an obstacle to greater openness, transparency and public accountability. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIf services are decentralised at a faster rate than local providers develop strong leadership and commitment to public service values and accountability, the conse
defaultquence for citizens will be that they wi
defaultl
defaultl be disempowered and silenced.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default November 
default2013 
default