&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultCST0004default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from Professor Tim defaultHopedefault 
default(submitted 
defaultin a personal capacity
default)
defaultTHE EFFECT OF ‘THIRD PARTY’ PRESSURE ON POLICE CRIME RECORDING PRACTICEdefaultSynopsisdefaultBackgrounddefault 
defaultconsiderationsdefault1. 
defaultThe 
defaultvast 
defaultmajority of crimes recorded 
defaultas 
defaultNotifiable
default Offences 
defaultby the 
defaultpolice 
defaultare the result of complaints made to them by members of the public
default (individual and corporate)
default, usually because they believe themselves to have been the victims of crime. 
defaultT
defaulthe belief that the statistics of Recorded Crime are a 
defaulttrue 
defaultmeasure of the extent of crime that occurs is no longer 
defaultcredible since it is no longer plausible to believe that the police are the only means 
defaultin society 
defaultfor 
defaultdealing
default with crime, that they are capable of surveillance and investigation sufficient to detect all wrong-doing, or that the public report all the crime that they encounter. Nevertheless, the media, opinion-leaders and the police service itself often seek to foster this anachronistic view of the police for a variety of reasons. The pursuit of such a fiction leads to public scepticism and mistrust not only of police crime recording but also of the police service as a whole.
default2. Nowadays, recorded crime is 
defaultbest seen as an output measure of the 
defaultpublic police services. 
defaultThe fundamental difficulty with Recorded Crime statistics is that they are at once both a measure of the demand for public police service and a measure of the supply of 
defaultthose 
defaultservices in response to that demand. Several issues compound the difficulty:
defaultTypes of third-party pressure on crime recordingdefault2. There are various kinds of third-party pressure on police recording, having different bearings upon complainants and police services respectively. The main types are:
defaultThese various pressures upon the police can have countervailing effects upon the volume and the type of crime that they record, which may vary from place to place and time to time. Some types of crime, some types of community, and different governance regimes, may all be likely to affect police discretionary recording and therefore the volume of crimes recorded. 
defaultSystematic recording adjustmentdefault3. I
defaultt is also likely that police operate 
defaultsystematic 
defaultrecording discretion as a kind of 
defaultmanagement adjustment
default to the pressures of workload and the constraints of the resources at their disposal.  Different circumstances may lead
default, respectively, 
defaultto different 
defaultand separate 
defaultpressures on police resources and accountability
default. Reconciling these may lead to systematic adjustments to recording practice.  For instance, w
defaulthen crime is going up, 
defaultpublic and political 
defaultpressure to reduce crime may increase at the same time as 
defaultpolice
default workload is also increasing due to the volume of complaints 
defaultwith which they are obliged to deal.
default Hypothetically, the police may then seek to deflate the volume of recorded crime 
defaultby systematic under-recording
default 
defaultin order 
defaultto reconcile these conflict
defaulting pressures
default. By the same token, when crime is dropping, the police may be able to afford to do 
default(or be seen to do) 
defaultmore, thus relax
defaulting the incentive to 
defaultunder-record
default. Nevertheless, if their resources are also declining (or they are incapable of making commensurate efficiency gains) they may then also seek to deflate the recorded crime rate by under-recording.
defaultThe Dark, Light, and Grey Figures of crimedefault4. Since the exercise of police discretion in crime recording lies beneath the radar of public accountability, its true nature can only be investigated by means of forensic ‘case tracking’ audit methods, such as those employed by HM Inspectorate of Constabulary. Even so, while these methods look in detail at the circumstantial evidence surrounding individual recording decisions (for example, distinguishing between 
defaultevidential
default and 
defaultprima facie
default approaches to recording complaints), they lose something of the ‘bigger picture’ of variation in the 
defaultvolume
default of crime recording, particularly in not being able to pick-up systematic recording effects. To do so requires comparison of trends and patterns in recorded crime against the yardstick of the public’s propensity to 
defaultreport 
defaultcomplaints to the police. Disparity between the propensity of the public to report crime and the propensity of the police to record crime can be inferred as the effect of systematic police recording discretion. This can result in three crime rates: 
defaultEvidence for the ‘grey figure’ (1): Not-defaultcrimeingdefault and No-defaultcrimeingdefault? default5. The police services log the calls that come in to their command and control centres from the public, a record of which is modified as a result of the report of the investigating officers, producing an outcome log of incidents attended.  In broad terms, this log can be considered a proxy measure of the demand for police service. Research was undertaken to compare rates of logged incidents resulting from calls from the public with rates of recorded crimes for a large and varied English police service area.
default Overall, there are many more calls to the police than there are crimes recorded from them; less than a fifth (18%) of incidents attended by the police are recorded as 
defaultNotifiable
default Offences, giving odds of 5 to 1 against a call being recorded as a crime.  It cannot be ascertained from the data whether this under-recording is due to: 
default6. 
defaultTable 1
default suggests that the most numerous category of incidents to which the public summon the police are incidents of anti-social, disorderly or violent behaviour, although the police seem likely to record only about one-in-five of them as crime. In contrast, although much less numerous, acquisitive incidents comprise the predominant type of incident that the police decide to record as crime. Clearly, there are a variety of reasons for this disparity: while anti-social behaviour may trouble the public most, many incidents may not support or warrant a criminal prosecution; in contrast, since relatively few incidents of property crime result in prosecution, it might be surmised that their higher rate of crime recording has more to do with third-party pressures.
default&#xa0;
defaultTable 1: Disparity between rates of incidents reported by the public to the police and rates of crimes recordeddefaultType of incident/crimedefaultProportion of reported idefaultncidents  default(Percentage)defaultProportion of recorded cdefaultrimes default(Percentage)defaultOdds defaultthat a call defaultto an incident defaultwill result in a defaultrdefaultecorddefaulted crimedefaultAnti-social Behaviour
default27
default30
default1 in 5
defaultViolence
default10
default9
default1 in 6
defaultBurglary and theft
default16
default58
default1 in 1.5
defaultOther
default46
default3
default1 in 100
defaultTotaldefault100
default100
default1 in 5
default&#xa0;
default7.  Our research also found that the disparity varied between different communities: 
defaultsocially deprived communities 
defaultnot only 
defaultreported more incidents 
defaultin total but also had 
defaulta 
defaultrelatively 
defaultgreater proportion recorded as crimes than better-off communities
default. It is possible that: 
defaultWhatever the reasons, these findings suggest that the statistics of recorded crime may form an imperfect and misleading measure not only of the problems faced by members of the public but also their actual need for and use of police services. 
defaultEvidence for the ‘grey figure’ (2): systematic ‘no(t)-defaultcrimeingdefault’?default8. It may be possible to infer that systematic recording adjustment might be taking place by looking at trends in the disparity between what victims say they report to the police - e.g. to the England and Wales Crime Survey (EWCS) - and what the police record as crime (see ONS, 2013). 
default 
defaultA 
defaultcomparison 
defaultcan be
default made between 
defaultan index of the 
defaultVolume of Reported Crime 
defaultand 
defaulta
defaultn
default 
defaultindex of the 
defaultGrey Figure 
default(i.e. 
defaultthe proportion of crimes reported to the police that appear to have been recorded
default) for two time-periods:
default8. T
defaulthe BCS 
default(now EWCS) records separately Burglary-with-
defaultLoss, and Nil-Loss Burglaries (including attempted burglaries). 
defaultAlthough both 
defaultoffences were subject to the same crime
default reduction performance pressure, 
defaultBurglary
default-with-L
defaultoss also entails (insurance-required) recording obligations, 
defaultwhile attempted and N
defaultil-Loss Burglaries do not
default (which
default can be seen in the much lower recording rate for the latter
default)
default. 
defaultFigure 1
default 
defaultsuggests
default that when the volume of 
defaultBurglaries-with-
defaultLoss went up, the recording rate went down, presumably reflecting a workload adjustment. Happily, w
defaulthen the volume of reported with-
defaultloss burglaries declined in the second period and the concomitant workload pressure subsided, the police could afford to let the recording rate rise again (almost to the maximum), thus 
defaultpresumably 
defaultsatisfying their recording obligation 
defaultto the insurers 
defaultwithout prejudicing their performance requirement
default with the Government
default. Conversely, neither 
defaultinsurance 
defaultobligation nor crime reduction requirement apply to Nil-Loss Burglaries, so that the recording rate remained low and constant across both periods, irrespective of a similar boom-and-bust trend in the volume of this crime
default, as shown in 
defaultFigure 2
default. Furthermore, since the volume of Nil-Loss Burglaries reported had de
defaultclined less than the volume of With-Loss B
defaulturglaries, the former now become a proportionately bigger part of the 
defaultrecorded crime figure. contributing to the view that the trend in recorded burglaries might have reflected the effectiveness of household security measures rather than, perhaps, police efforts to manage their workloads. 
default  
default&#xa0;defaultFigure 1: Comparison of Trends in the Volume of Reported Crime and the Percentage of Crime Recorded: 1981-1991 vs. 1991 – 2003/04, Burglary-with-LossdefaultFigure 2: Comparison of Trends in the Volume of Reported Crime and the Percentage of Crime Recorded: 1981-1991 vs. 1991 – 2003/04, Nil-Loss BurglarydefaultEvidence for the ‘grey figure’ (3): systematic ‘down-defaultcrimeingdefault’default?
default9. The practice of ‘down-
defaultcrimeing
default’ refers to a situation where a crime is recorded as less serious or more trivial than it might be otherwise. Down-
defaultcrimeing
default may be applied systematically to offences so as to take them out of a framework of performance indicators in order to make the performance appear to look better than it is. The inference that this may have taken place is suggested in 
defaultFigure 3
default, which
default again compares trends in the ‘grey figure’ between the periods 1981-1991 and 1991-2003/04.
default Perhaps reflecting public concern (moral pressure) about the rise in ‘mugging’ during the earlier period, the rate of recording of 
defaultRobbery 
defaulthad been increasing, although by 1991 this was still less than a half of the robberies that victims said they had reported to the police. However, during the latter period, the reduction of Robbery was designated as one of the Government’s crime reduction targets, which seems to have 
defaultdampened the enthusiasm of the police to record the offence. That this might be a systematic down-
defaultcrimeing
default adjustment is suggested by the increasing rate of recording of crimes that include some of the elements of the offence of Robbery but were not designated as crime reduction performance targets:
defaultThese trends suggest that through systematic down-
defaultcrimeing
default the police may have been able to continue to respond to moral pressure about violent crime while also evading the performance targets that were also supposed to reflect public concern.
defaultSummary default10. The analyses presented above demonstrate three 
defaultdecision-
defaultprocesses at work in the construction of recorded crime rates:
defaultThe basic decision process is that between the public and the police. Yet the influence of third-party pressure seems to have systemic effects on the police services discretionary practice of crime recording. Since Third Parties  intervene in that decision, by careful adjustment of their policies it might be possible to ‘nudge’ the public and police towards more accurate or reliable
default 
defaultcrime recording. While such alterations of the ‘choice architecture’ of crime recording might seem attractive in principle, this might not be so feasible in practice, since the kinds of third party pressures influencing crime recording also reflect the wide social and political context in which public police services are delivered currently. In the meantime, even the most careful (and costly) auditing of crime recording practice may only serve to keep the worst examples of discretionary recording in check.
defaultFigure 3: Comparison of Trends in the Ratio of Crimes Recorded by the Police to Crimes Reported by the Police, 1981-1991 vs. 1991-2003/04: Robbery, Wounding and Theft from the Person.defaultFurther readingdefaultHope, T. (
default2013). ‘What do crime statistics tell us?’. In C. Hale, K. Hayward, 
defaultA. 
defaultWahidin
default and E. 
defaultWincup
default (Eds.) 
defaultCriminology
default: 
default3
defaultrd
default Edition
default. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
defaultONS (2013) ‘Analysis of variation in crime trends: a study of trends in “comparable crime” categories between the Crime Survey for England and Wales and the police recorded crime series between 1981 and 2011/12. 
defaultMethodological Note, 24 January 2013
default. Office of National Statistics.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default 
defaultProfessor Tim Hope, Ph.D. holds the Chair in Criminology at the University of Salford, Manchester. Previously he has held positions at 
defaultKeele
default University, the Universities of Manchester and Missouri-St. Louis (USA), and at CACI Ltd. He has provided expert consultancy on crime statistics for the UK Statistics Commission and evidence to the 
defaultHoC
default Science and Technology Select Committee, and has numerous research publications based upon the analysis of British Crime Survey (BCS) and Recorded Crime data. He worked on the first generation of the BCS while serving at the Home Office Research and Planning Unit (1974-1991). 
default Data were
default kindly made available by t
defaulthe Chief Constable and included all calls and all recorded crimes for the year 2000, excluding road traffic incidents. Data were collected before the introduction of the NCRS, so they might not be similar to the situation now. Only a broad equivalence between incident and recorded crime codes could be established as sufficiently similar categorically. 
defaultThe research was funded by the Home Office, and is also presented in 
defaulta 
defaultslightly different form in Hope (2013
default; Table 3.1
default).
default The odds are calculated from the data using 
defaultBayes
default’ Rule, with the prior probability set as the overall recording probability (i.e. 0.18).
default 
defaultData are 
defaulttaken 
defaultfrom 
defaultthe Home Office Statistical Bulletin 
defaultCrime in England and Wales, 2003/04
default.
default 
defaultT
defaultwo indices were constructed
default: 
default 
default(1) a 
defaultVolume of Reported Crime Index
default (defined as the product of the Victimisation Rate (Table 2.02) and the proportion of incidents reported to the police (Table 3.02), with 1981 = 100); 
defaultand (2) a 
defaultGrey Figure Rate
default – the proportion of crimes reported to the police that appear to have been recorded (defined as the ratio of offences recorded by police (Table 3.04) to comparable crimes reported to police (Table 3.02). 
defaultUnfortunately, these figures have not been made routinely available in 
defaultCrime in England and Wales
default since the 2004/05 publication, although they have now been reported in ONS (2013).
default 
defaultThe data were collected and arranged in the same way as those in Figures 1 and 2 (see 
defaultpara
default. 7 and fn. 3 above.
default