&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr Fenton F. Robb (IPC0004)default&#xa0;
default              
defaultIPCC 
defaultAR5 
defaultis unashamedly presented, not as the outcome of scientific observation, but as a compilation of 
defaultthe
default opinions
default of a close community of experts
default. This is made abundantly clear in 
defaultSection 
defaultA Introduction paragraph 3.
default As the unadulterated facts of the matter are
default not available, this invites, indeed demands, 
defaultcriticism ad hominem.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThus, i
defaultt is legitimate
default, indeed essential,
default to examine the nature of the experience and learning of those pu
defaultrporting to be expert in this methodology
default and to expose them to criticism 
defaultby examining the following 
defaultissues
default:
default&#xa0;
default (a) This is a new discipline and few have been able to accumulate sufficient experience to qualify them as ‘experts’.
default What is an expert climatolo
defaultgist?
default&#xa0;
default 
default(b) Climatologists form a closely-knit peer group that shares an interest in promoting public alarm and provoking continued research.
default 
default&#xa0;
default 
default(c) 
defaultIt may be that, centred on UEA, several climatologists may be political activists who share a belief in 
default‘
defaultp
defaultost-normal science
default’
default which sees ‘scientific research’ not as a search for ‘truth’, but as a vehicle for the achievement of personal and collective 
defaultgoals
default. 
default&#xa0;
default (d) 
defaultClimatology is in effect a subset of the ‘Futurology’
default and cannot be subjected to the test of fal
defaultsification until after the future has been experienced. Thus it is crucial to discover why so many of 
defaultthe 
defaultIPCC 
defaultmodels failed to anticipate the stability of the
default climate over the past 15 years. AR5 offers 
defaultseveral 
defaulthypotheses about variables that were not exam
defaultined adequately in the models. No credence can be given 
defaultto
default su
defaultc
defaulth 
defaultexcuses unless and until there is evidence to support them 
defaultbut
default asking for more evidence promotes the expenditure of more public money in pursuit of a research methodology so dependent on exper
defaulttise as 
defaultit may b
default fatally flawed.
default&#xa0;
default (e) 
defaultThroughout the papers great emp
defaulthasis has been placed on trends from 
defaultthe past
default to the present and the inference is that these will continue unabated indefinitely.
default But the future need not be like the past and 
defaultin the instance of a highly complex and non-linear systems extrapolations from past trends are more likely as not to be misleading. 
defaultA point to this effect as made in AR1.
default&#xa0;
default (f) The definition of ‘climate scientist’ as one who believes that there is AGW and
default who engages in research, not to seek the causal relations that give rise to the phenomenon but engages in research about 
defaultits
default 
defaulteffect, rather than its causes precludes dissent about the founding hypothesis – that catastrophic global warming is taking place 
defaultas a result of human activity. So ‘all true climate scientist agree’ and those who dissent are not climate scientists.
default&#xa0;
default (g) Despite previous assessments providing the opinion that ever increasing temperatures were on the way, AR5 reverts to a prognosis si
defaultmilar to that of the First Assessment. Surely this must mean that there is less cause for alarm.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default