PUB0014default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from the defaultMidefaultnister for Government Policy  and default Midefaultnister of State for the Cabinet defaultOfficedefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultFollowing your call for evidence for your inquiry into the Citizen and Public Service Reform, we are writing as the lead Ministers with responsibility for Open Public Services. Open Public Services sets the framework for public service reform, within which individual Secretaries of State drive reforms at a departmental level. In this 
defaultmemorandum
default,
default therefore, we have set out
default defaultthe Government’s view on the questions raised in your Issues Paper (published 19 July 2013).   
defaultIn May 2010, when the Coalition Government first came to power, the state was still the default provider of most public services. From poor performing schools to widening health inequalities, there were clear signs that the old centralised model of public service delivery was unable to meet the complex needs of the 21st century. 
defaultThe landscape in which public services operate is shifting rapidly. Fiscal pressures and demographic changes have made new demands on public services. At the same time, people’s expectations for more reliable, personalised and digital public services are higher than ever. If we are to meet these challenges, we need innovation - fostered by an open environment - in which service provision is contestable and accountable so those providing the service have the scope and incentive to be imaginative and effective.
defaultOver the last two years, public services have responded to the bold agenda set out in the 2011 Open Public Services White Paper. The White Paper established five principles which set the policy framework through which public service reform would be developed. These principles are:
defaultUsing these principles, departments have made huge strides in releasing the grip of state control and putting power into people’s hands.
defaultWe have stripped out bureaucracy, placing power in the hands of medical professionals through clinical commissioning groups, and extending personal budgets in health and social care so people can decide how money gets spent on their care. 
defaultIn education, Free Schools, University Technical Colleges and academies are increasing choice and parent influence. 
defaultOur commitment to delivering services locally is making neighbourhoods and communities masters of their own destiny. Citizens have elected Police and Crime Commissioners. Local and neighbourhood councils have been granted new freedoms. 
defaultAll areas have been encouraged to adopt a community budget approach, where local partners collaborate to deliver more integrated and effective local public services at less cost to the taxpayer. The Public Service Transformation Network and “Our Place” programme are supporting this.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are creating a level playing field so that anyone with a good idea can get involved. In healthca
defaultre, the Any Qualified Provider
default scheme means that patients and GPs can select a service based on what’s important to them – perhaps one that is closer to home, has a shorter waiting time or better outcomes. 
defaultWe are revolutionizing the way we manage offenders in the community by opening up rehabilitation services to a wide range of providers on a payments by results basis to drive better outcomes and value for money. 
defaultTurning to the questions raised in your Issues Paper, we have grouped our response under broader headings so that we can deal with overlapping issues at the same time.
defaultImproving public services and increasing adefaultccountabilitydefaultThrough moving away from the old top-down approach to public services we have been able to place the power of choice in the hands of the individual, and give professionals providing the services the opportunity to respond innovatively to the needs of the individual. Through empowering citizens we have given them a voice through which they can drive the improvements in public services and ensure public services are accountable to the people who use them. 
defaultProgress has been made. Our 174 Free Schools have given power and choice to the individual making it easier for talented and committed teachers, charities and parents to open schools and address real demand within an area; as of April 2013 there are 2,886 
default a
defaultcademies open in England, all of which are empowered to make the changes they deem necessary to their schools; pupil premiums provide an extra funding of £900 per disadvantaged student to support them and close the attainment gap between them and their peers; health services are being transformed by giving patients and GPs the freedom to choose the healthcare that works for them: what they want, where they want it. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTo ensure that improvements are continually delivered it is essential that public services are held accountable to the people who use them, as well as to elected officials. In this way we have sought to combine ‘market accountability’ and ‘administrative accountability’ to exert maximum upward pressure on performance. So, while schools continue to be held accountable by government for their performance, as measured in progress and attainment data and in Ofsted inspection reports, they are also becoming increasingly accountable to parents who are also able to access comparative information about local schools, their characteristics and their performance
default.
default  Similarly, 
defaultin addition to the lines of accountability that flow from Chief Constables to
default the new, democratically elected
default Police and Crime Commissioners through to the public
default, the transparency provided by publishing crime statistics on 
defaultwww.police.uk
default now allows individuals and community groups to become better informed around community safety and to help drive improvements in their local areas
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn order to ensure that all citizens are able to benefit from transparency the Government is committed to becoming digital by default. In November 2012 the Government published a Digital Strategy detailing how we can provide greater access to information through developing increasingly efficient, cost-effective and simple to use services that are more convenient to the user. Gov.uk works to this end by providing citizens with access to information on one platform; publishing transactional service information for greater transparency; saving approximately £1.7 to £1.8 billion a year through moving transactional services offered by the central departments from offline to online. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultEmpowering citizens through choice and community defaultrdefaultightsdefault&#xa0;
defaultWherever possible, we want to give the power of choice to the individuals who use a service, we want funding to follow the choices of service users, and we want to give the professionals providing the service the freedom to respond imaginatively and innovatively to the competition that results. In the same way, for services that are communal rather than individual, we are committed to devolving control to local communities wherever possible so that local people can shape the decisions that affect them.
default&#xa0;defaultLocal communities and citizens are provided with the opportunity to take control and tackle local issues ranging from parents who are worried that their children do not have enough to do, through to businesses who are struggling to find local staff with the right skills, finding the solutions that work for them. 
defaultF
defaultor example, 
defaultOfsted’s
default Parent View platform allows all parents to feed into a range of performance aspects for their child’s schools.
defaultThe 
default“Our Place”
default programme supports neighbourhoods to improve their public services
default. As part of one of the twelve pilot schemes
default,
default 
defaultPoplar proposes
default to save the NHS £4 million over five years through 
defaulthealth volunteers 
defaultpromoting healthy lifestyles and improving treatment for those 
defaultmost 
defaultat risk of diabetes. 
defaultPlacing power in the hands of citizens drives providers to ensure better value for money: police officers and the community in 
defaultBalsall
default Heath are developing fortnightly street patrols with residents at a
default proposed
default cost of £35,000 but is estimated to provide £547,000 worth of benefit over five years. The Government recently announced a further £4.3 million which will enable a further 100 areas to develop an “Our Place” approach by March 2015.
defaultThe Government highlighted choice as one of the core principles for open public services. It is this choice which has empowered citizens to tailor services according to their individual needs. Public services no longer abide by the maxim ‘the man in Whitehall really does know best’; instead individuals are able to choose what works best for them. Recognising that more could be done, the Government asked David Boyle to conduct an independent review into the barriers to choice in public services, with a particular focus on those most disadvantaged. The Government publish
defaulted
default a response earlier this year endorsing his findings
default.
defaultNow, we have published the choice f
defaultrameworks for NHS care; social housing; adult social care; school education and funded early education that set out in a clear and accessible format the choices that people can expect to be offered, how they can find information to support these choices and what to do if they are not given the choices to which they are entitled. The Choice Charter brings these principles to bear on all individual public services.
defaultIt is now easier for the most vulnerable to take as much control as they want over their care and support, with more than half of social care users in community settings now having personal budgets. We have placed personal budgets in social care on a legislative footing for the first time, setting out how they will be provided to everyone as part of their care and support plan. Under recent NHS England Participation Guidance, commissioners will now ensure that every person with a long-term condition or disability has a personalised care plan supporting them to develop the knowledge, skills and confidence to manage their own health.
default&#xa0;
default Further to this, NHS Continuing Healthcare Patients will have the right to ask for a Personal Health Budget from April 2014, and clinical commissioning groups will be able to offer Personal Health Budgets to other patients.
defaultWhere services are community based rather than at the level of the individual
default,
default the Government has committed to devolving control and decision making to local communities. By empowering local clinicians to take control of the NHS budget our reforms to social and health care have ensured that services are designed around the need of the individual.
defaultIn particular, local groups have been empowered to formally recognise assets of community value since the establishment of Community Rights in 2012. As of October 2013, 535 assets had been recognised as being 
defaultof community value; two of which had been bought by the community through Right to Bid.
default 
defaultA dozen or more community groups have engaged their local authority to propose alternative plans for the running of local services. Whilst not all of these lead to a formal tendering process, many result in productive dialogue and co-design. Thus far, three Build Orders have been approved under the Right to Build with others in development. Following the success of Neighbourhood Planning, demand is expected to increase.
default&#xa0;
defaultDiversity of providers and mdefaultodelsdefault&#xa0;
defaultA healthy public service market stipulates that the state 
defaultshould 
defaultno longer be the default provider. We have worked hard to introduce a number of different models in contracting with the private, public, voluntary and social enterprise sectors.
defaultPayment by results
defaultPayment by r
defaultesults focuses the attention of services and service providers on outcomes that matter for citizens, rather than on targets for inpu
defaultts or activity. In doing so, payment by results
default schemes offer the prospect of flexible providers tailoring services to user needs, spurring innovation and ensuring that government only rewards success.
defaultPayment by r
defaultesults is increasingly a core part of many public services including health, employment, drug recovery, housing, immigration and services for troubled families; and new pilots have been launched in debt collection, international development and psychological therapies. 
defaultT
defaulthe Government has introduced payment by results
default to a wide range of public services. Thes
defaulte services deploy a range of payment by results
default models and are at very different stages of development.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultEarly signs of success are apparent. In the 
defaultPeterborough prisondefault defaultsocial impact bdefaultond (a form ofdefault pdefaultayment by rdefaultesultsdefault)default, interim figures show a fall in the frequency of re-conviction events while nationally there has been a rise. The 
defaultpdefaultayment by rdefaultesults pilots at HMP Doncasterdefault show a similar trend of a fall in the re-conviction rate in the cohort period compared to the two periods covering the baseline year. 
defaultPublic sector 
defaultm
defaultutuals
defaultSince 2010, the Cabinet Office has engaged around 140 emerging and established public service mutuals across 14 different sectors, ranging from social care and integrated health to libraries and school support services. More than 75 are already live and trading, together delivering well over £1 billion of public services. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBy freeing employees to deliver and improve their services as they know best, mutuals enable innovation, and because they feel more engaged, staff are likely to stay longer with the organisation and miss fewer days of work. Our latest data shows that absenteeism and staff turnover fall 20% and 16% respectively after an organisation has spun out. 
defaultMutuals are also proving successful at generating new business, expanding into more areas and winning additional contracts, acting as engines for small business growth in their local communities. Our latest data shows that mutuals have an average projected revenue growth of 10% over the next year.
defaultThere is support available for staff forming public service mutuals from the Mutual Support Programme, which comprises a website, dedicated hotline and a £10 million fund. The fund is used to procure professional support on behalf of developing mutuals, and as of September 2013 we are already supporting over 35 projects, with a further 30 receiving early-stage ‘One-to-Many’ training
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultSocial i
defaultnvestment 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would also like to highlight social investment as another
default example
default in which greater competition has been introduced to public service reform driving up the quality, innovation and outcome of the services provided. It has created opportunities for new and small providers to enter the market and expand their offer. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe have increased competition and improvement across public services through committing 
default£
default7.5
default million of the £10 million Invest and Contract Readiness Fund to support social ventures seeking social investment or large contracts; and backing the first four social incubators to support social venture start-ups through the £10 million Social Incubator Fund with further awards to be announced early 2014. All of which has driven competition, innovation and quality leading to improvements in public services. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Government is driving further reforms that will create an increasing number of opportunities for small voluntary
default, community, and social enterprise
default sector organisations and other community groups to get involved in the delivery of public services.
default For example, in the context of the Government’s probation reforms, support has been provided through the Invest and Contract Readiness Fund for 
defaultmutuals
default and rehabilitation support organisations
default; 
default399 voluntary and community organisations and social enterprises have registered an interest in delivering services to offenders under the
default Government’s probation reforms;
default and the Government is currently consulting on a range of measures to make public procurement easier for small organisations to engage with. 
defaultAs we have opened up public services to a diverse range of providers, it has become more important than ever that we have professional, lean procurement processes in place. We have set up a Commissioning Academy to help commissioners deliver more efficiently and effectively while embracing new and innovative forms of delivery that drive value for money. We have also trained 1,000 government practitioners in lean methods to help reduce the costs and length of the procurement process and published the procurement pipeline that gives an indication of potential I
defaultnformation and Communications Technology
default and F
defaultacilities 
defaultM
defaultanagement
default opportunities which may be competed over this Parliament, with an estimated value of £5 million or more.
default&#xa0;defaultRole of GovernmentdefaultThere is still a role for Government to play. However, rather than dictate the public service agenda the Government seeks to be an enabler in establishing a framework within which public service ownership is devolved to the lowest level possible. With this in mind, and using the Open Public Services framework, Secretaries of State are able to drive reform at a departmental level whilst local authorities will have fewer restrictions on funding, less regulation and performance management from Whitehall, and new opportunities to raise revenue. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Government has rightly emphasised transparency and a greater use of evidence which better equips Secretaries of State and local authorities to make the best decisions. For example, Data.gov.uk has now collated over 10,000 datasets making them available online, informing officials on the performance of a service and allowing them to analyse and benchmark their performance against other public services. Additionally, the six What Works centres will accrue and assess the most robust information on where public money should be directed to improve public services. Two existing centres of excellence – the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE) and the Educational Endowment Foundation will be joined by four new independent institutions on tackling crime; promoting active and independent ageing; effective early intervention; and the What Works Local Economic Growth centre that launched last month.
defaultAn integrated approach between these different tiers of the public sector is necessary in order to deliver public services well, particularly those supporting vulnerable individuals and families. This has been clearly demonstrated by the work of the Whole Place Community Budget pilots (established by the Government in four areas in 2011). For example, London’s Tri-borough 
default(Westminster, Hammersmith and Fulham, and the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea)
default 
defaultidentified that 20% of the local population with the most serious health conditions
default 
defaultaccounted for 77% of health and social care costs. With that knowledge, they then designed integrated health and
default 
defaultsocial care centres to reduce the costs of caring for them. Research for the Local Government Association has estimated that if the same approaches were rolled out nationwide, the public sector could make
default 
defaultup to £20.6 billion in net savings over five years.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis same, integrated approach is also demonstrating clear benefits in the Troubled Families programme. 
defaultGovernment data collected in October and November 2011 estimated that £9 billion is spent annually on troubled families – an average of £75,000 per family each year. 
defaultThe programme (costing £448 million over three years) has generated 
defaultpositive early results
default 
defaultby using payment by results to incentivise more integrated working with these families by local services
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultDespite the benefits of joined-up working, it remains challenging in practice. That is why the Government made better cooperation between services at the local level a key objective for the 2013 Spending Round, committing to:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAs we hope we have illustrated, huge strides have been made already.  But this is only part of a longer journey of reform that will continue apace throughout the remainder of this Parliament.
default&#xa0;defaultWe hope you will find this 
defaultmemorandum
default helpful and invite the Committee to consider it as part of its deliberations. 
defaultOliver Letwin
default will, of course, be
default delighted to appear before the Committee to give evidence.
defaultOctober 2013default