&#xa0;
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultPreventing visual impairment
default can deliver substantial downstream cost savings which should be factored into the efficiency gains. These 
defaultprovide
default a better overall interface between the health care and social care, which will bring about longer-term improvements in efficiency, preventive
default care and reablement.    
default1. Introductiondefault&#xa0;default1.1
default 
defaultThis document sets out the response of the Optical Confederation to the Health Select Committee inquiry into 
defaultP
defaultublic
default E
defaultxpenditure
default on Health and Social Care
default. It builds 
defaultup
defaulton 
defaultwritten evidence
default submitted to the 
defaultCommittee on the same topic in September 2011
default.
default&#xa0;default1.
default2
default 
defaultThe Optical Confederation represents the 12,000 optometrists, the 6,000 dispensing opticians and 7,000 optical businesses in the UK who provide high quality and accessible eye care ser
defaultvices to the whole 
defaultpopulation. 
defaultThe Confederation is a coalition of the five optical representative bodies: the Association of British Dispensing Opticians (ABDO); the Association of Contact Lens Manufacturers (ACLM); the Association of Optometrists (AOP); the Federation of M
defaultanufacturing Opticians (FMO) and the Federation of Ophthalmic and Dispensing Opticians (FODO).
default As a Confederation, we work with others to improve eye health for the public good. 
defaultThe Optical Confederation welcomes this opportunity to submit
default comments
default to the 
defaultinquiry
default on public expenditure
default, and would be willing to support the Health Select Committee in making equity and excellence in eye care
default a reality
default.
default&#xa0;
default2.) defaultProgress on making efficiencies through the integration of health and social care services.default&#xa0;
default2.1
default 
defaultThe
default increase in demand for NHS eye care services 
defaultrequires
default careful planning by all health and social care professionals in order to slow, or even to halt, this rise. 
defaultSome progress has been made with 
defaultthe establishment of Local Eye Health Networks (LEHNs) across all NHS England Local Areas. 
default&#xa0;default2.2
default defaultThe aim is that
default these
default LEHNs will bring together all local eye health stakeholders in a clinically-led, patient- and population-focussed model to achieve progre
defaultss against the sight loss indicator locally. This will involve assessing local eye health needs, redesigning pathways as necessary in line with QIPP
default 
defaultprinciples and maximising the deployment of resources across primary, secondary, social and voluntary secto
defaultr care for health gain.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 As previously mentioned, 
defaulteye care services can be a lead area for QIPP, freeing up resources in the NHS, and delivering quality improvements at low cost. A very noteworthy innovation in eye care is the development of the Commis
defaultsioning Toolkit for Eye Care by the UK Vision Strategy. This toolkit highlights why eye care services should be prioritised, the potential for a small investment to deliver siz
defaulte
defaultable results, and provides guidance to support the commissioning of better eye 
defaultcare services across the NHS.
default 
defaultMoreover, the recently formed
default Clinical Council for Eye Health Commissioning 
defaultwill also aim
default to offer united, evidence-based clinical advice and guidance to those commissioning and delivering eye health services in England on is
defaultsues where national leadership is needed.
default&#xa0;
default2.4 
defaultThe Clinical Council for Eye Health Commissioning plans to work in partnership with NHS England, to support the development of services to meet local needs and improve outcomes based on best evidence and in th
defaulte most patient sensitive and cost-effective ways.
default 
defaultThe Clinical Council is now contributing to the development of NICE accredited commissioning guidance on cataract and glaucoma services.
default 
defaultThe Council will then move on to look at the best ways of improving t
defaulthe quality and efficiency of services for age-related macular degeneration and diabetic retinopathy in line with indicator 4.12 of the Public 
defaultH
defaultealth 
defaultO
defaultutcomes 
defaultF
defaultramework
default.
default&#xa0;default3.default defaultITdefault default&#xa0;
default3.1 
defaultIn line with the NHS’s vision for referrals to be completely paperless
default by 2018, the
default interconnectivity of community optical, GP, Choose and Book and hospital eye service IT systems should be 
defaultmade a
default priority
default by government
default as it will enable rapid exchange of clinical, referral, financial and audit data. The Scottish Government 
defaultis already making good progress towards this goal and, as a Confederation, we warmly welcomed NHS England’s announcement in June 2012 that they were in the early stages of developing a national specification for primary ophthalmic services (POS) claims and
default payments, an important first step towards greater connectivity in England and collecting outcomes data. We look forward to working with all relevant stakeholders to achieve integrated IT systems, as mentioned above, as their absence is a major obstacle to
default integrated eye care.
default&#xa0;
default4default.) defaultReports of particular financial pressures in the system, such as funding for General Practice, and for Accident and Emergency servicesdefault4
default.1 
defaultUrgent eye care is provided by GPs, optometrists, A&amp;
defaultE departments, minor injury units, eye casualty departments and rapid-access outpatient clinics. An urgent eye condition is any eye condition that is of recent onset and is distressing or is believed by the patient, carer or referring health professional t
defaulto present an imminent threat to vision or general health. However many patients treated by the urgent eye care service have non-urgent conditions, particularly patients who self-refer to eye casualty. 
default4
default.2 
defaultMost hospital urgent eye care services report that
default they struggle to keep pace with demand. Demand for hospital eye emergency services is thought to be increasing. Evidence from London, shows that over a five year period up to 2011, demand at two major eye casualty units increased by seven and ten per cent
default year on year
default and eye emergencies are estimated to make up 1.46-6% of accident and emergency attendances
default. However, most urgent eye conditions are non-acute and relatively straightforward to treat
default. 
default4
default.3 
defaultTo make services more accessible and reduce pressur
defaulte on hospital eye casualty, a significant proportion of patients can be diagnosed and managed in a primary care instead by a healthcare professional with a slit lamp (which allows you to see the front and back of the eye in detail and is needed to diagnose
default most urgent eye conditions) and the skills and experience to use it. GPs do not usually have slit lamps or enough experience of using one, but community optometrists do and are
default 
defaultwell placed to promptly diagnose, triage and treat patients with urgent eye 
defaultpr
defaultoblems safely and efficiently.
default4
default.
default4
default 
defaultOther efficiencies could be made by nationwide adoption of 
defaulta number of successful enhanced eye care services, namely in glaucoma referral refinement, management of stable glaucoma, and primary eyecare assessment in 
defaultcommunity optical practices.  These tried and tested schemes have delivered better patient outcomes, local cost savings, reduced waiting times and helped to deliver a local patient-centred service without increasing patient risk.
default Adopting these schemes ha
defaults also freed up significant capacity in secondary eye care to focus on patients facing acute or chronic sight loss. 
default&#xa0;default5. defaultFalls preventiondefault&#xa0;default5.1 
defaultThe impacts of sight
default loss on older people are well 
defaultdocumented, including the role uncorrected visual problems pla
defaulty in falls and performance of 
defaulteveryday
default tasks
default.
default 
defaultThe full financial cost of these falls to the NHS and social care has not been calculated, however it is conservatively estimated
default by the Royal National Institute of Blind People
default at £25 million per year
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultEpivision (2009) for RNIB Future Sight Loss UK (2)
default Tate et al (2005) The prevalence of visual impairment in the UK; A review of the literature 
defaultwww.rnib.org.uk/xpedio/groups/public/documents/PublicWebsite/public_prevalencereport.doc
default Access Economics (2009) for RNIB Future Sight Loss UK (1)
defaulthttp://www.opticalconfederation.org.uk/downloads/
defaultconsultations/OC%20Submission%20to%20HSC%20Inquiry%20into%20Public%20Expenditure.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.commissioningforeyecare.org.uk/
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/216162/Improving-outcomes-and-supporting-transparency-part-21.pdf
default, p.112-114.
default 
defaultSmith H
defaultB, Daniel CS, Verma S Eye Casualty Services in London Eye (Lond) 2013 Mar;27 (3):320-8 Epub 2013 Feb 1  
default Flitcroft DI, Westcott M, Wormald R, Touquet R. Who should see eye casualties?: a comparison of eye care in an accident and emergency department with
default a dedicated eye casualty.. 
defaultJ Accid Emerg Med
default. 1995 12(1):23-7.  
default Bhatt R, Sandramouli S Evidence-based practice in acute ophthalmology. 
defaultEye 
default2007; 21(7):976-83. Epub 2006 Apr 28. Review.  
default 
defaulthttp://www.locsu.co.uk/enhanced-services-pathways/
default 
default Studies have shown that falls can be reduced by as much as 14% when visual impairment is considered as 
defaultpart of a falls reduction plan (Day L, Filders B, Gordon I et al, Randomised factorial trail o
defaultf falls prevention 
defaultamong older people living in their own homes, BMJ, 325: 128, 2002)
default 
defaulthttp://www.rnib.org.uk/aboutus/Research/reports/inclusion/Pages/falls_cos
defaultts.aspx
default 
default