&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Hospedia (PEX 0026)default&#xa0;
defaultAbout Hospedia:defaultHospedia is the world’s leading operator of Point of Care software and services in healthcare, covering 70,000 beds in 
default158
default sites, delivering Patient Media, Patient Engagement and Clinical Workflow to the bedside.  Hospedia is also the UK’s leading provider
default of Patient Flow Management software to over 20 hospitals.
default&#xa0;
defaultSummary: default&#xa0;
defaultContextdefault&#xa0;default1.1default Hospedia’s
default services are directly aligned with the Department of Health’s Information Strategy, which aims to transform the way information is used in the NHS, and can play a ke
defaulty role in delivering on the pledge to find 
default£15bn-£20bn 
defaultof savings in the NHS by 2014, the ambition of a paperless he
defaultalth service by 2018, and serve
default as a robust response to the Francis Report’s call for a more patient-centered focus.
default&#xa0;
default“The driving ambition 
defaultunderlying the challenge to deliver greater productivity and a stable financial position is not only to maintain the quality of services of patients, but to improve it”
defaultKings Fund, February 2013default&#xa0;
default1.2default 
defaultTherefore
default,
default a
defaults Trusts continue to find ways of improving 
defaultpatient care while delivering their annual CIPs, the
defaultre is a clear
default need to engage with IT solutions 
defaultto deliver on these objectives
default.
default 
defaultHospedia’s point of care services can deliver significant benefits to patients and 
defaultclinicians, from improvements in patient w
defaultell-being and reduced length of stay to clinical efficiencies, streamlined workflows and reduced paperwork.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultHospedia’s Servicesdefault&#xa0;
default2.1default 
defaultHospedia has developed a range of services
default, which include Electronic Meal Ordering (EMO), Clinical Access, Real Time 
defaultPatient Feedback (RTPF) and the Extramed Patient Flow Management System
defaults
default. These services
default allow Trusts to deliver clinical support services at the bedside without the need to invest in new IT infrastructure.
default&#xa0;
default2.2default 
defaultIn more detail, the individual Deloitte repo
defaultrts identify that NHS Trusts have the potential to deliver on key priorities via one or more of the following services:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultElectronic Meal Orderingdefault (EMO)default3.1default 
defaultEMO 
defaultsupports
default not only cost improvement goals but also 
defaultfood wastage reduction
default and 
defaultpatient experience improvements,
default such as 
defaultimproved patient nutrition
default and reduced length of stay
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default3.2default 
defaultEMO 
defaultalso reduces the time between order and delivery from 15
default hours to just 2 hours, releasing
default staff time spent printing, distributing and collecting paper menus, 
defaultinstead 
defaultenabling staff to focus on patient care.
default&#xa0;
default3.3default 
defaultNHS catering managers estimate that 
defaultreduction in 
defaultfood waste could b
defaulte as high as 60%. With over £27m 
defaultworth of hospital food being waste
defaultd
default across the NHS
default, reducing the number of untouched meals represents a massive economic advantage.
default&#xa0;
default3.4default 
defaultIn a recent survey, 85% of patients identified that fo
defaultod and catering services were a significant contributor to their overall satisfaction during a hospital stay
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.5default 
defaultWith EMO, patients are offered an improved choice of meals compared to paper systems, an
defaultd are able to receive personalis
defaulted menus based on 
defaultdietary requirements.
default&#xa0;
default“The EMO system means patients get a wider choice of menu, and they order and consume their meals on the same day. This greatly enhances patient experience within this hospital”
defaultDenise Richardson, Hospital Catering Manager, Bournemoudefaultth &amp; Christchurch Hospitals NHS Foundation Trustdefault&#xa0;
default3.6default 
defaultHospitals should 
defaultalso 
defaultregularly evaluate their food services an
defaultd act on feedback from patients.
default EMO provides the tools for hospital caterers to gather patient opinion using ordering patterns that are ca
defaultptured electronically.
default&#xa0;defaultClinical Accessdefault4.1default 
defaultAs well as delivering financial benefits, investing in Clinical Access also supports patient engagement and involvement at the point of care, improvements in care and 
defaultalso in delivering 
defaultNHS initiatives such as the drive to become paperless by
default 2018.
default&#xa0;
default4.2default 
defaultThe service provides staff with decision-making information and data capture in real time
default. It also serves as 
defaulta platform from which 
defaultstaff
default can access a range of applications directly at the bedside, including Picture Arching and Communications Sy
defaultstems (PACS), blood results and ordering, e-pharmacy, patient admissions systems, and even patient records, thereby reducing the reliance on paper based processes.
default&#xa0;
default4.3default 
defaultInterviews with NHS Managers confirm that using the service releases the equivalent of 
default14 members of staff per year, releasing time to be spent on delivering patient care and producing a time saving valued at £335k per annum, while the production saving generated through avoiding the volume of paper currently produced for each in-patient
default saves £60k.
default 
defaultThe sites at which 
defaultClinical Access
default is already in use include Mid Essex Hospital Services NHS Trust, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust and Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust.
default&#xa0;defaultReal Time Patient Feedbackdefault (RTPF)default5.1default 
defaultOne of the key themes identified by the Francis Report was the importance of 
defaultlistening to patients, in real time, and using that feedback to improve outcomes
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default5.2default 
defaultRTPF collects and aggregates patient feedback in real time, providing the opportunity to review the data from hospital-wide results to granular, ward-level feedback, s
defaultupporting immediacy in responding to the information captured.
default&#xa0;
default5.3default 
defaultAnalysis by Picker Institute Europe reveals that the service provides higher response rates providing a more representative view, unbiased data and a respondent profile that includes tradi
defaulttionally hard-to-reach demographics such as young and 
defaultethnically diverse
default patients
default.
default&#xa0;
default“We use Hospedia to deliver the new friends and family survey requirement…This requirement is delivered by the same system Hospedia provide us to capture in-patient survey
defaults – consolidating our feedback real time into one easy to use, organisation-wide system” 
defaultLynn Thomas, Head of Patient Experience &amp; Public Engagement, Mid Essex Hospitals Trustdefault&#xa0;
default5.4default 
defaultMid Essex Hospitals Trust have been using RTPF since 2011 to deliver in-pa
defaulttient surveys to 
defaultnot 
defaultonly recognise timely opportunities for service improvements but also reward success. The Trust is now also using the service to deliver the
default Government’s
default Friends and Family Test requirement.
default&#xa0;defaultInPatient Flow Manager (IPFM)default6.1default 
defaultThis service is a software-based system that supports clinical best practice through electronic whiteboards and desktop applications, mo
defaultnitoring patient flow and bed availability in real time. 
default&#xa0;default6.2default 
defaultIt records and tracks the status of each patient, sharing this data between departments, clinical staff and administrative functions. This in turn saves time and improves accuracy
default, optimising p
defaultatient journeys, delivering significant savings, and improving patient experience.
default 
default&#xa0;
default6.3default 
defaultAs an example, patient information can be input directly into the electronic system, saving 1,000 clinical hours per annum. It also drives a reduction in average 
defaultlength of stay by 13%
default and 
defaultthe benefit of reduced infection rates through IPFM is equal to 42 QALYs (quality adjusted life years
default), translating to a value of £864k per annum to patients.
default&#xa0;
default“[Hospedia’s] patient flow expertise and understanding of the challen
defaultges involved were compelling factors in our decision to purchase. This system allows us to manage beds in real time down to the individual bed level, free up nursing time to focus on patient care and improve our discharge planning”
default default 
defaultSiobhan Jordan, Deputy defaultDirector of Nursing, Mid Essex NHS Trustdefault&#xa0;
default6.4default 
defaultEast Lancashire NHS Trust has used IPFM for the 
defaultpast
default 
defaultfour
default years to manage patient flow across 1,000 beds in 
defaultfive
default hospitals. In 2013 it decided to utilise
default IPFM to support new CQUIN targets for Dementia Assessmen
defaultts. Within 
defaulttwo
default months of using it, the Trust had completely transformed their performance, consistently over-achieving against the 90% compliance required for each of the three stages of the target, necessary to release the CQUIN funding associated with th
defaulte improvement of dementia assessments.
default&#xa0;defaultEmergency Patient Flow Manager (EPFM)default7.1default 
defaultThere are over 20 million 
defaultadmissions
default at A&amp;
defaultE departments each year across the NHS in England
default and, with pressure on NHS resources rapidly increasing, manual methods of managing patient flows are time consuming and inefficient.
default&#xa0;
default7.2default 
defaultEPFM
default is designed to replace the traditional whiteboard method of tra
defaultcking patient flow from A&amp;E through to admission or discharge. 
default&#xa0;
default7.3default 
defaultLike the 
defaultIPFM
default product
default, the system records and tracks the status of each patient, sharing this data in real time and avoiding the need to locate available beds by telephoning individual 
defaultwards.
default&#xa0;
default7.4default 
defaultIn an example of the service’s broad utility, the effective management of patient flow can help to reduce elective surgery cancellations, alleviating ward bed unavailability, one of the causes of surgery cancellations
default. As approximately a quart
defaulter of patients attending emergency care are subsequently admitted to hospital, tracking the status of these patients is fundamental in managing bed availability. Therefore the value of reducing surgical cancellations, estimated at a 17% reduction
default, represe
defaultnts a benefit of £137k per annum.
default&#xa0;
default7.5default 
defaultEast Cheshire NHS Trust turned to EPFM to deliver a solution 
defaultthat would help 
defaultclinical front line staff manage the four hour wait-time target and enable data capture to support payment-by-results income. Through a clos
defaulte working relationship during the implementation 
defaultand change management process, EPFM has 
defaultgone
default beyond the initial offering, delivering enhanced functionality and increasing staff engagement.
default&#xa0;
default“The [Digital] Whiteboard is the first time we’ve had a visual cl
defaultue as to what’s happening in the department. If you see someone who is starting to near breach point you can follow it up and find out why. Everyone is really keen to use it, because it’s actually fun and easy to operate” 
defaultChristine Scott, Operational Leaddefault Nurse, East Cheshire NHS Trustdefault&#xa0;defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Source: SSentif report, January 2013
default Source: Hospedia survey of 24,434 hospital patients, 2013
default Number of pages estimated by Deloitte to be between 75 and 125 sheets. Calculations are based on average of 100 sheets
default http://www.midstaffspublicinquiry.com/report
defaulthttp://www.pickereurope.org/
defaultassets/content/pdf/Frequent%2520Feedback/Bedside%2520TVs%2520survey%2520pilot%2520report_LD_SS_v2%25200%2520
default QALYs provide a monetary value for calculating health outcome improvements
defaulthttp://www.institute.nhs.uk/quality_and_service_improvement_tools/qua
defaultlity_and_service_improvement_tools/cancelled_operations.html
default Calculation based on analysis of surgery cancellations before and after implementation of EPFM, controlling for the trend rate of improvements.
default