&#xa0;
defaultWritten defaultevidence defaultsubmitted by Professor T H Pennington MB BS, PhD, defaultFRCPathdefault(AMR0013)default&#xa0;
defaultSummary
default 
defaultThis evidence focuses on the application of next-generation DNA sequencing to 
defaultthe AMR problem
default. 
defaultWhole genome sequencing of clinical isolates of pathogenic bacteria in real time will significantly improve our ability to 1) 
defaulttrack their routes of transmission, 
default2) 
defaultdetect new resistant organisms 
defaultand 3) identify targets for new antibiotics.
default I recommend that it should receive designated funding.
default&#xa0;
defaultI was Professor of Bacteriology at the University of Aberdeen from 1979 to 2003 and President of the Society for General Microbiology from 2003-2006. I chaired the Public Inquiry into the 2005 South Wales 
defaultE.coli
default O157 outbreak, which published its report in 2009. I was appointed CBE in 2013 for services to microbiology and food hygiene, and am a Fellow of 
defaultthe Royal Society of Edinburgh, the Royal College of Physicians of Edinburgh, and 
defaultthe Academy of Medical Sciences
default. I am President of MRSA Action UK.
default&#xa0;
defaultI have conducted research
default on several aspects of antibiotic act
defaultion and resistance
default, including the inhibition of smallpox replication by rifampicin, MRSA fingerprinting, and the molecular basis of the resistance of 
defaultNeisseria
default 
defaultmeningitidis
default to 
defaultrifampicin
default.
default A
default particular focus of my work
default has been
default 
defaultthe development and application
default 
defaultof 
defaultmolecular fingerprinting methods to 
defaulttra
defaultck the spread of pathogens
default.
default&#xa0;
default1.
defaultWhole genome sequencing on a routine basis of large numbers of clinical isolates of pathogenic bacteria is now possible. 
defaultIn the last decade the 
defaultcost and turn round time of DNA sequencing has fallen like a stone. In 2001 sequencing a human genome cost $100M. It now costs $8,000. The rate of fall of costs began to outpace Moore
default’
defaults Law for computers (the number of transistors on an integrated circuit doubles every two years) in January 2008 with the introduc
defaulttion of next-
defaultgeneration sequencing methods
default&#xa0;
default2.The power and utility of next-generation sequencing was illustrated by studies on the 
defaultenormous outbreak
default of bloody diarrhoea and the haemolytic 
defaulturaemic
default syndrome in Germany
default (well over 4,000 cases and 50 deaths)
default and 
defaulta smaller one in 
defaultFrance 
defaultcaused by 
defaultE.coli
default O104:H4 (
defaultGrad,YH
default, 
defaultLipsitch
default M &amp; 32 others (2012) Genomic epidemiology of the 
defaultEscherichia coli
default O104:H4 outbreaks in Europe, 2011. 
defaultProc 
defaultNatl
default 
defaultAcad
default 
defaultSci
default USA
default 109:3065-3070.
default) 
defaultThese authors conclude
defaultd
default ‘this study argues strongly for multiple genome sequences to understand patterns of transmission within an outbreak, Such analyses can already be conducted in a matter of days
default, and technological advances will only improve our ability to perform them in real time….As this example demonstrates, the results of such analysis, combined with traditional epidemiology, can raise novel epidemiologic hypotheses and questions that are available through sequencing of multiple isolates’.
default&#xa0;
default3. There is still much
default uncertainty regarding the routes of transmission of many important pathogens. A good example is 
defaultStaphylococcus 
defaultaur
defaulteus
default. 
defaultAlthough much progress has been made in reducing the incidence of MRSA infections, this has now levelled off
default  (the Public Health England Quarterly Analyses of Mandatory 
defaultStaphylococcus 
defaultaureus
default bacteraemia published on September 2013 says for MRSA ‘The total number of MRSA bacteraemia reports has shown a small increase of 6% when compared to the same period last year – from 224 in Q2 2012 to 237 in Q2 2013.’)
default 
default 
defaultStaphylococcus 
defaultaureus
default ( and 
defaultcoagulase
default negative staphylococci) are by far the commonest causes of infections following hip
default surgery
default. It
default is not
default possible to identify with any degree of certainty either the route of transmission or the source of the infecting organism in 
defaultmany 
defaultpatients infected with these organisms. 
defaultIn my vie
defaultw the uncertainty that still exists regarding the source and transmission routes of pathogens
default comes from a failure to investigate the epidemiolog
defaulty of such cases using modern methods. B
defaulty far the most important priority for clinical microbiology is to provide information relevant to the 
defaultmanagement of the patie
defaultnt from whom samples were taken; 
defaultbut 
defaultit hardly ever goes further
default.
default An enormous number of isolates of pathogens is made in the NHS every year.
default I consider that 
defaultthe application of next-generation sequencing of whole genomes to some of these isolates 
defaulton a significant scale 
defaultcoupled with the clinical information that accompanies them and traditional epidemiology
default,
default is likely to
default improve our understanding of their sources and routes of transmission
default,
default 
defaultand the evolution of antibiotic resistance mechanisms and their spread, 
defaultby orders of magnitude. 
defaultIn turn it is highly likely that such advances will provide evidence that in turn will enhance our ability to detect, understand and control AMR organisms.
default&#xa0;
default4
default. 
defaultI consider that th
defaultis would make a material
default and rapid
default contribution to one of the three
default strategic aim
defaults
default of t
defaulthe UK 5 Year Antimicrobial Resistance Strategy 2013-2018
default : ‘I
defaultmproving the knowledge and understanding of AMR
default’
default. This
default document mentions whole genome sequencing in 
defaultpara
default 4.7, 4.12 and 5.3 and recommends that its development and uptake be promoted by Research Councils, other research funders, and academics.
default But funding for it is not identified in the AMR strategy impact assessment. It is possible that some projects using it will be
default conducted or supported by the 
defaultproposed National Institute for Health Research Health Protection Unit on AMR and Health Care Associated Infections.
default However, I consider that next-generation whole genome sequencing of bacterial genomes is so likely to deliver benefits regarding AMR
default that it should be identified for specific support.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default