&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence from Dr Rodger Patrick [CST0005]default&#xa0;
defaultIntroduction:default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default1.   defaultQ1: Are crimes being recorded by the police when they should be? Are crimes being categorised correctly?default1.1default 
defaultThe short answer to 
defaultboth 
defaultthese questions is 
default“
defaultno
default”.
default1.2default 
defaultThe Natio
defaultnal Crime Recording Standard (NCRS) was introduced in April 2002 in order to ensure that police forces across the country were recording crime to a common standard. The then 
defaultHome 
defaultSecretary David Blunkett stated that this was a fundamental requirement if cr
defaultime was to be tackled effectively.   It was also believed that it would increase trust in the police as victims’ needs would be paramount in such a system
default. The 
defaultNCRS 
defaultstates:
default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe aim of NCRS is todefault&#xa0;defaultbe victim focused and maintain a consistent data set of defaultrecordeddefault&#xa0;defaultcrime allegations across all forces.default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
default 
defaultFollowing the initial registration, an incident will be recorded as a crime (notifiable offence) if, on the balance of probability:default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
default(a) thedefault defaultcircumstances as reported amount to a crime defined by law (the defaultpolice will determine this, based on their knowledge of the law and counting rules), and (b) there is no credible evidence to the contrary.default(Home Office 2006: Appendix A)default1.3default 
defaultPrior to the introduction of the NCRS an ‘evidential’ crime recording standard wa
defaults being applied. This involved victims having to convince the police that a crime had actually occurred. 
defaultIn effect officers were treating victims as suspects. 
defaultThis system had a long history of abuse as officers
default 
defaultemployed a number of dubious measures to ensu
defaultre 
defaultreported crimes
default didn’t appear in the official returns. These included
default:
default&#xa0;
default1.4default 
defaultWrongly categorising more serious crimes as lesser offences is also a way of hitting key targets such as burglary reduction. These would include
default:
default&#xa0;
default1.5default 
defaultThese methods are collectively known in police circles as ‘cuffing’ after the magician’s art of making objects dis
defaultap
defaultpear up their 
defaultsleeve or cuff (Young 1991).
default 
default1.6default 
defaultWhist the NCRS enjoyed a brief period of success from 2002-2004 it suffered from a re
default-
defaultinterpretation from 2004 onwards. 
defaultThis 
defaultcan be traced back to
default the 
defaultthen Prime Minister Tony Blair’s 
defaultinitiative
default to reduce street crime. Dur
defaulting this 
defaultoperation
default,
default involving the twelve forces with high robbery rates
default,
default it became evident that victims of robberies involving mobile phones were reporting these offences sometime after the incident. It was also discovered that mobile phone providers were 
defaultadvising victims to report 
defaulttheir 
defaultphones 
defaultas 
defaultstolen in order to validate their insurance
default claim
default. 
defaultDespite the evidence from the British Crime Survey that victims of robberies are reluctant to report
default 
defaultthe
defaultse crimes
default to the police
default,
default 
defaultwith 
defaultonly 
default51%
default reporting 
default robber
defaultie
defaults to the police 
default(
defaultDodd et al default2004:38default)
default, 
defaultthose officers co
default-
defaultordinating the street crime initiative convinced themselves that a high percentage of reported robberies were false reports in pursuit of bogus insurance claims. This led to the introduction of ‘false
default reporting’ policies which required victims to prove the
defaulti
defaultr report was genuine. In effect a return to an ‘evidential’ crime recording standard. 
default1.7default 
defaultThis in turn led to a re-interpretation of the NCRS where the 
defaultoverriding 
defaultvictim focussed emphasis was replac
defaulted by the secondary conditions
default,
default 
defaultinitially 
defaultrelating to third party reports, based on a ‘balance of probability’ test carried out by the police. The evidence (Patrick 2011a) suggests this re-interpretation spread from robberies to all offences and then from 
defaultforce to force.  The impact on the recorded crime rates is evident from the analysis of Nottinghamshire’s recorded crime
default profile (Fig. 1)
default  
default1.8default 
defaultThe Nottinghamshire data (Fig 1) shows a significant rise in 2001 corresponding with an HMIC inspection report
default (HMIC/Notts 2001) criticising their recording procedures which were clearly based on an ‘evidential’ standard. The sudden fall in 2004/05 corresponds with the introduction of false reporting procedures and would suggest a return to the previous ‘evidentia
defaultl’ standard of crime recording.    
default  
default1.9default 
defaultSimilar patterns are 
defaultclear
default from an analysis of other forces where evidence of a shift back to an ‘evidential’ standard and associated ‘cuffing’ has emerged.  
defaultA report in the Daily Mail 
default( 6.5.08default) defaultcontained a revelat
defaultion from a police ‘whistle blower’ that officers in Norfolk had been instructed not to record reports of criminal damage unless the victim could prove it was not accidental
default. This 
defaulthad a dramatic impact on the levels of criminal damage in that force (Fig. 2)
default. Again the return to pre NCRS levels is significant.  
default  
default 
default 
default(FIG. 2)
default1.10default 
defaultMore recently the Police and Crime Commissioner of Gwent cited un
default-
defaultreliable crime recording as grounds for asking the Chief Constable to retire
default.
default The 
defaultHMIC audit of crime recording procedures suggested 
default‘cuffing’ was occurring:
default              default“HMIC looked at 120 incidents logged by Gwent Police. Seventeen had been wrongly default              defaultclosed without a crime being raised, which indicated that crime recording in Gwent gives default              defaultcause fdefaultor concern.” HMIC/Gwent 2012default1.11default 
defaultThe same report indicated recorded crimes were also being wrongly categorised
default and the authors were 
defaultclear on where the blame lay:
default              default“The quality of crime and incident data would be significantly improved if there were default              defaultgreatdefaulter clarity and focus from chief officers and the police authority on the importance of default              defaultthe issue.” HMIC/Gwent 2012default1.12default 
defaultFurther
default evidence of ‘cuffing’ emerged in Kent in 2012 when HMIC investigated the force 
defaultafter
default an officer ‘blew the whistle’ on
default ‘gaming’ 
defaultbehaviours designed to improve the detection rate. 
default1.13default 
defaultThe Chief Constable of Kent, who had previously served in Norfolk, announced his retirement in October 2013
default.
default 
default1.14default The 
defaultresearch on which this submission is based
default w
defaultas
default recently corroborated by a report from the Office for National Statistics: 
default              default“Given the consistent pattern, one possible hypothesis is that there has been a gradual default              defaulterosion of compliance with the NCRS such that a growing number of crimes reported to the default              defaultpolice are not being captured in crime recording systems. There are a range of possible default              defaultdrivers for this including: default&#xa0;default              default• lack of awareness or adequate understanding of the NCRS as time passes from its launch default              defaultleading to some officers recording ‘as chargedefaultd’ or ‘if detected’ which might result from default              defaultstaff turnover and lack of sufficient on-going training; default&#xa0;default              default• performance pressures associated with targets (e.g. to reduce crime or increase default              defaultdetection rates) acting as perverse incentives for some crimes to bedefault downgraded from default              defaultnotifiable into non-notifiable categories or as ASB or as crime-related incidents (which are default              defaultnot captured in data returned to the Home Office); default&#xa0;default              default• though forces have continued with their own internal audits, the cessation of default              defaultindependedefaultnt audits from 2006/07 onwards may have reduced the focus on addressing non-default              defaultcompliance; default&#xa0;default              default• the move to Neighbourhood Policing in recent years may also have led to more low level default              defaultcrimes being dealt with informally and outside the formal crime recording defaultsystem; and, default&#xa0;default              default• in the context of pressure on police budgets and a general policy shift to promote greater default              defaultofficer discretion, a return to a more evidential recording model”default default              default              default              default              default              default              default              default              default(Flatley and Bradley 2013:12)default&#xa0;default1.15default 
defaultWhilst th
defaultis
default submission is technical 
defaultin nature, 
defaultthe human cost of such perverse behaviour should not be overlooked. The failure to record crimes prevents 
defaultoffences
default being investigated and offenders brought to justice. 
default In a number of cases this has 
defaultallowed 
defaultcriminals
default 
defaultfre
defaulte rein to commit serious crimes, including murder
default. 
default 
defaultIn 2006 the IPCC investigated the contact Colette Lynch had with Warwickshire police prior to her death. In this case it emerged Warwickshire officers failed to record 
defaultand investigate a report of criminal
default damage involving the victim’s estranged partner. The IPCC made the following comment on the force’s crime recording procedures:
default “A review should be undertaken of the extent to which those who are required to implement the policies on domestic violence, crime recording and call handling are aware of their responsibilities.” (IPCC 2006:5)     default&#xa0;
default1.16default 
defaultThe impact of such an unsympathet
defaultic response to victims 
defaultis encapsulated by the 
defaultexperience of 
defaultthe parents of 
defaultone Birmingham schoolboy
default,
default who was robbed at 
defaultgunpoint:
default&#xa0;
default“The  couple claim they were told they could sign a form to say they had made a fdefaultalsedefault report and pay an £80 fine – or face a defaultcourt summons” (Lillington Birmingham Post 15.7.12) default 
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default2. defaultQ2. What are the factors which can influence defaultmdefaultis-recording of crime?default&#xa0;
default2.1default Performance Management as a system of control has since its inception been vulnerable to ‘gaming’ type behaviours A
defaultr
defaultgy
defaultr
defaultis a leading expert conclud
defaulted
default:
default&#xa0;
default              default“the dream of many management information system designers is to design a default              defaulttamper-default              defaultproof, guaranteed-to-catch-the-culprit information system. default defaultIf they succedefaulteddefault, they will also default              defaultsucceed in superimposing on defensive routines a control system that will call the default              defaultindividuals to new heights of creativity on how to bypass the threatening features of the default              defaultinformation system.” (Adefaultrdefaultgyris 1985:147) default&#xa0;default2.2default The advent of ‘false reporting’ pol
defaulticies and associated re-interpretation of the NCRS is an example of this theory in action.
default The fact that Performance Management systems are a threat to the leadership of the service explains the involvement of 
defaultc
defaulthief 
defaulto
defaultfficers in the re-interpretation of the
default NCRS. Once th
defaulte NCRS
default was undermined
default 
defaultthen pressure could be applied throughout the system to ensure that 
defaultobstacles were placed in the way of victims and offic
defaulters under-record
defaulted
default crime
default. 
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.3default 
defaultOfficers are fully aware of how the system operates and also know 
defaultthat if something goes wrong then senior officers will deny any knowledge or complicity
default.
default This phenomenon is referred to as
default ‘organisational hypocrisy’ default(Ericson 1981).
default2.4default 
defaultResearch has also established that 
defaultsending an officer to assess every report of crime 
defaultresults in less crimes being recorded: 
default“It seems plausible that crime allegations dealt with by telephone investigation are more likely to be accepted ‘at face value’ by the police. By comparison, it is inevitable that where police officers do attend crimdefaulte scenes they will be in a position to be more discriminating about allegations made” (Burrows et 2000:28)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default2.default5default 
defaultThey went on to conclude
default:
default“If the hypothesis posed by the research team – that forces which attend more crime scenes will tend to record fewer defaultcrime allegations (or categorise offences more rigorously) – is credible, this factor is likely to influence that force’s low crime rate” (Burrows et al 2000:29).default2.default6default 
defaultThis could explain why sending an officer to every reported crime has been adopted by a 
defaultnumber of forces claiming impressive reductions in recorded crime
default e.g. Merseyside, Essex 
defaultand
default Kent
default. Of course this policy is 
defaultpresented
default as good practice in customer care.  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3. defaultQ3. Are the right checks in place to ensure that the systems for recording crimedefault function effectively and accurately?default&#xa0;default3.1default 
defaultThe evidence presented above demonstrates that quality control systems have consistently failed to ensure reliable data. However the re
default-
defaultinterpretation of the NCRS to an universal ‘balance of possibility’ standard 
defaultmakes the task of any auditor extremely difficult. To question the judgment o
defaultf
default an officer who has attended the scene of an incident and decided a crime has not occurred is a time consuming task 
defaultpo
defaulttentially
default 
defaultinvolving re
default-contacting
default the 
defaultvictim.
default&#xa0;
default3.2default 
defaultThe data 
defaultquality checks carried out by the Audit Commission did provide a degree of independent scrutiny however they were discontinued with the demise of the organisation.
default 
defaultThe
defaulti
defaultr report on the falling standards at the Met 
default(Audit Commission
default/
defaultMPS 2007
default)
default 
defaultcorresponded with a 
default6
default% reduction in recorded crime
default in that force. This
default was exposed by Andrew Gilligan in the London Evening Standard 
default(17.4.08)
default.
default 
default 
default 
default&#xa0;
default3.3default 
defaultThe Home Office also used to carry out validation checks on 
defaultpolice recording rates
default as part of the Nation
defaultal Crime Survey. However they stopped 
defaultpublishing the results 
defaultin 2006 
defaultwhen it 
defaultbecame
default clear 
defaultrecording rates were falling
default:
default     
default&#xa0;
default“Comparing with the previous year, there have been reductions in the estimated recording rate for burglary (77% to 64%), bicycle theft (62% to 54%) and robbery (53%default defaulttodefault default44%)default”default (Walker et al 2006:47)default3.4default defaultIn 2005 I had alerted the National Crime Registrar to t
defaulthe suspicion that the NCRS was being interpreted literally and the ‘balance of probability’ rule applied to all reports. This senior statistician’s role was to oversee and offer guidance on the NCRS and at that time he was of the opinion that victim sovere
defaultignty was still the overriding consideration and the ‘balance of probability’ test was only to be used in relation to third party reports
default. However
default at a further meeting in 2006 the same individual confirmed the ‘balance of probability’ test was in fact bein
defaultg applied universally.  It should be noted that at the time of the second meeting th
defaultis official
default had been replaced as National Crime Registrar by a Police Superintendent on secondment
default from the Met.
default3.5default 
defaultThe reliability of police recorded crime data has been 
defaultthe subject of number of reviews
default;
default Smith 2006 and The National Statistician 2011. Whilst they have tended to be supportive
default,
default notes of caution have started to appear in 
defaultlater 
defaultreports:
default 
default              
default“Despite the existence of the NCRS the quality of recorded crime data wildefaultl vary as default              defaultthere will always be an element of subjectivity in recording against the crime default              defaultcategories, default              defaultand interpretation of the HOCR that guide that coding. Police recording policies and default              defaultprocesses may also vary, leading to inconsistencies in recording.”default (National Statistician default              defaultJune 2011:13)default&#xa0;
default3.6default 
defaultIn 2011 HMIC carried out a further National audit of crime recording standards and found little of concern (HMIC 2012). However this finding has been questioned by the results of 
defaultthe 
defaultreport from the Office for National Statistics 
default(Flatley and Bradley 2013)
default and
default the revelations at Kent
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.7default 
defaultThe variation in these national reports is in marked contrast to the rank and file who have consistently made disclosures exposing the fact that th
defaultey are being pressurised into under-recording crime.
default  
defaultThese regularly appear in the local press e.g. the Birmingham Mail revealed West Midlands Police had been systematically under recording shoplifting offences for years (5.2.13).  A West Midland’s office
defaultr contacted 
default the TV show The Wright Stuff to report that crime was increasing but they, the police, weren’t recording it: she cited the ‘cuffing’ of common assaults in support of her disclosure
default 
default(Channel 5: 19.7.13). 
defaultSuch failings have been a feature of man
defaulty domestic homicides
default.
default 
default 
defaultThe
default Police
default Federation have also highlighted the issue at their conferences
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4. defaultQ4. Has enough been done to ensure the integrity of crime data? What more should be done?default&#xa0;default4.1default 
defaultThe fact that police officers are openly admitting that they are ‘fiddling the figures’ 
defaultsuggests not enough has been done.
default&#xa0;
default4.2default The research I conducted on this topic 
default(Patrick 2011b)
default 
defaultled me to the conclusion that too close a relationship between Chief Offi
defaultcers of Police and those responsible for their governance and regulation led to what Hood and Bevan (2006) referred to as a Nelson’s eye approach to scrutiny. This was manifestly clear from the response to the HMIC audit of detections 
default(Appendix A) 
defaultwhich le
defaultd to ACPO approaching the Information Commissioner. The correspondence between ACPO and the Information Commissioner makes it self-evident th
defaultere was 
defaulta reluctance to expose critic
defaultal
default failings
default (Appendix B)
default.
default   
default&#xa0;
default4.3default 
defaultThe shift in responsibility for publishing c
defaultrime statistics from the Home Office to the Office for National Statistics appears to have stimulated the report by Flatley and Bradley
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default4.4default The problem with the ‘looseness’ introduced to the NCRS through its re
default-
defaultinterpretation as an universal ‘balance of
default probability’ 
defaultstandard
default 
defaultneeds to be addressed
default. This can be achieved by moving to a ‘prima facia’ standard ensuring that all offences reported are recorded as crimes. In the past this approach has been adopted by forces caught manipulating their figures 
defaultthus 
defaultdemonstrating that if sufficiently incentivised chief officers are capable of delivering accurate data.
default&#xa0;
default4.5default 
defaultThere needs to be 
defaultan 
defaulteffective
default, fully 
defaultindependent audit regime with statutory powers to inspect
default, require change and impose sanctions
default. A 
defaultsubsta
defaultntially 
defaultreformed HMIC 
defaultcould perform
default this function.  The powers conferred on the Police and Crime Commissioners (PCC) to dismiss Chief Constables should ensure compliance. However it may be worth considering introducing legislation empowering the Home Secre
defaulttary to force the PCC to call an election if standards of crime recording are so poor 
defaultthat the public cannot have confidence in the data on which they are expected to judge the force’s performance
default.
default&#xa0;
default4.6default The pressure created by performance indicators to eng
defaultage in ‘gaming’ behaviours could be mitigated by a radical change in emphasis on what is measured.  If the performance measures on which forces are judged were qualitative 
defaultaudit results 
defaultand other quantitative data was viewed as for learning purposes it sho
defaultuld be possible to develop a knowledge based approach to policing. This approach 
defaultwas
default advocated by Jackson 
default(2005). 
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default5. defaultQ.5default defaultTodefault defaultwhat extent can policy-makers have confidence in the statistics which result from the recording of crime by police forces?default&#xa0;default5.default1default 
defaultTo base policy decisions on such un-reliable data could be counter- productive.
default 
defaultHowever
default consistent identifiable patterns in the performance data linked to various categories of police ‘gaming’ provides a reliable means of detecting the presence of such pe
defaultrverse behaviours. 
defaultThis could be used to 
defaultfocus
default the activities of the regulatory bodies if they were so inclined.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default6. defaultQ6. Should recorded crime statistics be classified as National Statistics?default&#xa0;default6.1default 
defaultSuch a title 
defaultconfers 
defaultscientific 
defaultstatus and 
defaultan 
defaultimpression of neutrality
default 
defaultfor 
defaultwhich the current data does not 
defaultqualify
default.
default&#xa0;
default6.2default A more accurate definition would be 
default“
defaulta police statistical construct of crime in England and Walesdefault”default.default 
defaultSuch a title
default would alert users to the dangers 
defaultof
default relying on 
defaultthe
default data.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultReferences:default&#xa0;defaultArgyris C. (1985)
default    Strategy Change and Defensive Routines
default, Pitman, 1985
default&#xa0;defaultBevan &amp; Hood (2006). What’s Measured is What Matters: Targets and Gaming in the English Public Health Care System. 
defaultPublic Administration
default Vol. 84, No 3, 2006 (517-538)
defaultBurrows J., R. Tarling, A. Mackie, R. Lewis and G. Taylor (2000). 
defaultReview of Police Force’s Crime Recording Practices. 
defaultHome Office Research Study 204.  A Research, Development and Statistical Directorate Report, London.  Home 
defaultOffice
defaultDe Bruijn, H. (2002). 
defaultPerformance measurement in the public sector
default. London Routledge
defaultDodd T., S. Nicholas, D. Povey, A. Walker (2004). 
defaultCrime in England and Wales 2003/2004.
default Home Office Crime Bulletin. Home Office 10/04.
defaultEricson, R.V. (1981) ‘Rules for Police Deviance’, in 
defaultOrganisational Police Deviance
default, Shearing (ed), 83-110. Toronto: Butterworths
defaultFlatley J
default. &amp;
default J Bradley (2013).
default defaultAnalysis of variation in crime trends: 
defaultA study of trends in ‘comparable crime’ categories 
defaultbetween the Crime Survey for England and Wales and the police recorded crime series between 1981 and 2011/12
default 
defaultOffice for National Statistics; Crime, Regional and Data Access Division;  
default24 January 2013
default&#xa0;
defaultH.M. Government 2003.    Select Committee on Public Adm
defaultinistration: Chapter 2: Problems of the measurement culture and attempts to solve them. On line report 
defaultwww.parliament
default. The-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm200203/cmselect/cmpubadm/62/6205.htm 
default29/07/2003
defaultHer Majesty’s Ins
defaultpector of Constabulary (HMIC), (1999). 
defaultPolice Integrity England Wales and Northern Ireland. Securing and maintaining public confidence
default. June 1999 Home Office
defaultHer Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary (2001). 2000/
default2001 
defaultInspection
default of Nottinghamshire Police
default  ww
defaultw.hmic.gov.uk
defaultHer Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary (HMIC), (2012). Gwent Police. 
defaultA Review of crime and Incident Reports.
default  January 2012. HMIC 
defaultHer Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary (HMIC), (2012). ‘The Crime Scene: A Review of crime and Incident Report
defaults. National Report 25
defaultth
default January 2012. HMIC 
defaultHer Majesty’s Inspector of Constabulary (HMIC), (2013). 
defaultCrime Recording in Kent: 
defaultA report commissioned by the Police and Crime Commissioner for Kent © HMIC 2013 
defaultwww.hmic.gov.uk ISBN: 978-1-78246-151-7
defaultHome Offic
defaulte Counting Rules (2006). 
defaultwww.homeoffice.gov.uk
defaultIndependent Police Complaints Commission (2006b). 
defaultInvestigation into circumstances attendant upon the death of Colette 
defaultLynch
default.
default IPCC July 2006
defaultJackson A (2006) Falling from a great height: Principles of good practice in performance measurement and the perils of top down determination of performance indicators. 
defaultLocal Government Studies
default 
defaultVol. 31default No 1 February 2005 
default&#xa0;
defaultK
defaultlienig, J. (1996
defaulta
default), 
defaultThe Ethics o
defaultf Policing.
default Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
defaultKleinig, J., (1996b). 
defaultHandled with Discretion: ethical issues in police decision-making.
default Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield
defaultLikierman A. (1993), Performance Indicators: 20 Early Lessons from Manageri
defaultal Use
default. Public Money &amp; Management
default October-December 1993
defaultLoveday B. (1994), Police Reform: Problems of Accountability and the measurement of Effectiveness. 
defaultStrategic Government
default 
default2default (1 Spring), 7-23.
defaultLoveday B. (2000). 
defaultManaging
default Crime: Police Use of Crime Data as an Indicator of Effectiveness. 
defaultInternational Journal of the Sociology of Law
default, 
default28default, 215-237. Academic Press
defaultLoveday B. (2005). The Challenge of Police Reform in England and Wales, 
defaultPublic Money and Management
default Oct. 2005, pp 275-281. 
defaultNational Statistician (2011).  
defaultNational Statistician’s Review of Crime Statistics: England and Wales.
default June 2011.Her Majesty’s Government London
default&#xa0;
defaultNewburn, T. (1999), 
defaultUnderstanding and preventing police corruption: lessons from the l
defaultiterature.
default Police Research Paper 110. Home Office
defaultPatrick R. (2009) 
defaultPerformance Management, Gaming and Police Practice: A Study of Changing Police Behaviour in England and Wales During the Era of New Public Management.
default University of Birmingham. PhD Thesis.
defaultPatrick, R. (2011a). ‘Reading Tea Leaves’
default defaultan assessment of the reliability of police recorded crime statistics. 
defaultThe Police Journal.
default  Vol. 
default84 defaultNo. 1 pgs. 47-67. Vathek Publishing
defaultPatrick, R. (2011
defaultb
default). 'Public Champions or Protectors of Professional Interests
default?' Observations on the performance of those bodies entrusted with the regulation of the Police Service during the era of New Public Management’ The Police Journal.  Vol.
default 
default84default defaultNo. 4
default 
defaultpgs. 344-371 Vathek Publishing
defaultRogerson, P. (1995). Performance Measurement a
defaultnd Policing: Police Service or Law Enforcement Agency? 
defaultPublic Money &amp; Management
default, October-December 1995
defaultSmith A, ( 2006) 
default‘Crime Statistics: An Independent Review’.
default Home Office London
defaultSmith J.  (2003). 
defaultThe nature of personal robbery
default. Home Office Research St
defaultudy 254. London: Home Office
defaultUK Statistics Authority, (2010)   
default‘Overcoming Barriers to Trust in Crime Statistics: England and Wales’ 
defaultUK Statistics Authority London
defaultYoung M., (1991)
default.  An Inside Job.  Policing and Police Culture in Britain
default. Oxford: Claredon
default Press
default1
default&#xa0;
default