&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault the Research Council for Complementary Medicine (RCCM) (AMR0020)defaultHow has antimicrobial resistance developed in the past decade? 
default1.0 Introduction
defaultI am submitting comments on 
defaultthe above call for evidence on 
defaultbehalf of the Research Council for Complementary Medicine (RCCM)
default, a 
defaultcharitable Trust (
defaultwww.rccm.org.uk
default). 
defaultIn summary, we
default highlight the lack of
default&#xa0;
defaultsynthesis and appraisal of current research evidence of effective natural products which may have potential against infection and drug resistance. In addition we believe that it is
default&#xa0;
defaultimportant that the UK work with different countries in order to obtain practical solutions
default.default2.0 
defaultWhat are the gaps in our knowledge about antimicrobial resistance? 
default2.1 
defaultThere is evidence of 
defaultthe 
defaultpotent antimicrobial activity 
defaultfor
default a number of natural substances used in Traditional Chinese Medicine, Western herbal medicine, Ayurveda, naturopathy and aromatherapy. A systematic review of the relevance of this for clinical practice and public health has not been conducted but would be a welcome addition to the evidence base on antimicrobial resistance. Since many of these natural substances are also low cost, this has the potential for identifying cost savings. This is particular pertinent since the high costs of developing new antimicrobial pharmaceuticals is reflected in their price. 
default2.2 
defaultFurthermore, the contribution of nutritional interventions in patients at risk of developing antimicrobial resistance has not been explored in depth, but evidence suggests that there are interactions between healthy intestinal microbes and resistant organisms that may be clinically exploited
default (1,2)
default.
default3.0 
default&#xa0;
defaultIs there sufficient research and investment into new antibiotics or other treatments and methods to ensure continued protection against infection? If not, how could this be rectified? 
defaultThe potential of a number of natural compounds
default, some of which that have
default already 
defaultbeen 
defaultevaluated and have been used in mainstream clinical use
default,
default should be explored further, 
defaultand this should 
defaultinclud
defaulte
default cost benefit analyses 
default(3-8)
default4.0  .
defaultWhat global coordination and action is required to fight antimicrobial resistance and is the UK contributing enough towards cross-border initiatives? 
default4.1 
defaultFor example research on Chinese plant extracts have demonstrated the high levels potent antibacterial activities, demonstrated as being a result of a group of chemicals called flavonoids which are found in species such as. 
defaultRadix 
defaultSophorae
default 
defaultFlavescentis
default.
default&#xa0;
default The plant alkaloid 
defaultberberine
default has been shown to possess different antimicrobial activities (an active ingredient of 
defaultRhizoma
default 
defaultCoptidis
default)
default. Antifungal effects from published research data have also shown that compounds isolated from these Chinese herbal medicines are effective against a wide range of pathogenic microorganisms as well as drug resistant MRSA. Similarly plants found in the South America and Africa have been shown to have properties which could be harnessed. 
default&#xa0;
default4.2 
defaultOn 
default7
defaultth
default Nov 2008 in Beijing Dr. Margaret Chan, Director General – World Health Organisation (WHO), addressed the WHO Congress on Traditional Medicine by saying
default“The two systems of Traditional and Western medicine need not clash. Within the context of primary health care, they can blend together in a beneficial harmony, using the best features of each system, and compensating for certain weaknesses in each. This is not something that will happen all by itself. Deliberate policy decisions have to be made.
default&#xa0;
defaultBut it can be done successfully.”
defaultThe second World Health Organization (WHO) global strategy for traditional and complementary medicines is due for consideration and ratification by the World Health Assembly in May 2014.
default&#xa0;
default This is an excellent opportunity to identify how the UK can be a partner in a coordinated action in order to fight antimicrobial resistance and facilitate cross-border initiatives.
default5.0 
defaultWhat are the strengths and weaknesses of the Government’s 2013-2018 strategy for tackling antimicrobial resistance? What changes might be made to further strengthen the Government’s action plan?
default5.1 
defaultThe focus on single compounds, working on single targets within microbial cells or viral replication, makes the development of resistance a question of when, not if, it will develop, due to the rapid mutation of microbial genes. One of the advantage of using some natural substances is that they usually contain more than one active substance, thereby reducing the risk of microbial resistance developing rapidly. 
default&#xa0;
default5.2 
defaultAnd in the spirit of integrated medicine, some natural substances work in synergy with pharmaceuticals (
defaultfor example the case of 
defaultmanuka
default cit
defaulted previously
default).
default&#xa0;
default6.0 
defaultBackground
default of the organisation 
defaultThe RCCM is a charity was founded in 1983 to encourage and facilitate research into complementary medicine and to ensure that the results were as widely disseminated as possible. With Department of Health funding the RCCM carried out detailed reviews and critical appraisals of the published research in specific complementary therapies focusing on key areas of NHS priority. This work was carried out in partnership with the Royal London Hospital for Integrated Medicine and School of Life Sciences at the University of Westminster 
defaulthttp://www.rccm.org
default.
defaultuk/node/11
default  and 
defaulthtt
defaultp
default://www.rccm.org.uk/node/12
default. The Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) Specialist library subsequently developed based on critical appraisal of available evidence from randomised controlled trials was included in the NHS National Library for Health, and this was subsequently taken over by NICE. The content no longer appears as a specific topic entity but some reviews may be found by searching by specific topic areas on  
defaultwww.ev
defaulti
defaultdence.nhs.uk/search
default . 
default7.0 
defaultCo
defaultnclusion
defaultWe understand that to address the issues of increasing antimicrobial resistance requires a range of innovative strategies. The opportunities using
default naturally occurring products as a source of antibacterial/microbial agents and to take advantage of exciting advances in genomics. A systematic and comprehensive review of the current literature is needed to evaluate the potential of underexplored natural products which may yield new opportunities to fight infection. 
defaultReferences
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default