&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Staffordshire County Council (PEX 0031)defaultIn terms of the inquiry, we welcome the opportunity to present our views and responses to the core themes the committee is considering. 
defaultStaffordshire County Council has transformed how it works 
defaultin order 
defaultto become focused on outcomes, using innovation, insight and smarter use of resources and 
defaultcommissioning and 
defaultprocurement to meet future challenges in the public sector. Integration is a sign
defaultificant part of this agenda. 
defaultThis transformation is outlined in the council’s strategy entitled ‘Achieving Excellence’ which 
defaultis 
defaulta single vision to establish a “connected Staffordshire, where everyone has the opportunity to prosper, be healthy and happy”. 
defaultThis vision is matched by organisational values and behaviours, which are in turn expressed through three key outcomes:
defaultIn meeting these outcomes, the council is committed to challenging organisational assumptions and boundaries. We believe we have to work much more closely with partners, residents and communities to ensure the £7.5bill
defaultion spent by the public sector in Staffordshire each year is used to maximum effect. We believe that by emphasising partnerships and outcomes we can ensure that each public sector partner focuses on doing 
defaultand delivering on 
defaultwhat they do best
default, with the whole
default achieving more than the sum of the parts
default. 
defaultOur vision involves looking at the fundamental role of the council and its partners in people’s lives now, and looking at how that role could develop in future years, when the impact of technology and societal ch
defaultange are considered. For Staffordshire 
defaultC
defaultounty 
defaultC
defaultouncil, our strategic strengths in developing an overview and insight of need within the county 
defaultare 
defaultmatched by our ability to commission the best provider
defaults
default to deliver our outcomes. 
defaultOur work has already been 
defaultrecognised with a commended in the MJ Awards 2013 in the Integrated Care category, and the County Council is also heavily involved in various national projects such as the Year of Care Early Implementer, a national Going Further Faster site for Personal He
defaultalth Budgets
default,
default a CH Direct Payments in Care Homes Trailblazer site
default, and most recently 
default. 
defaultOur response:defaultBroadly, we believe that the Nicholson Challenge represents a ‘make or break’ moment for the NHS to address the need to implement a much clearer approach to efficiency. We believe it is crucial that this is achieved to support the development of a m
defaultore integrated system between health and social care. 
defaultHowever, we believe that there is a need to look beyond efficiencies to the role in which a change in priorities from acute to early intervention and prevention would contribute to the development of s
defaultavings. We believe that 
defaultp
defaultrevention 
defaultand early intervention 
defaultcan
default manage need in a more proactive way
default than 
defaultsimply 
defaultpushing for efficiencies, which although valuable do not address any strategic challenges
default. 
defaultThe health and social care system needs to shift its mi
defaultndset from seeking to make the existing approach run more efficiently to instead designing a new system that delivers better outcomes at lower cost. 
defaultFor example, instead of spending significant amounts of money on treating obesity and its related condition
defaults, we will move our investment to supporting people to eat a healthy diet from an early age and to be active in their daily lives.
defaultThis relies upon s
defaulttrong 
defaultlocal l
defaulteadership and partnership working where we can better influence the spending across the entire
default system of health and wellbeing. This is about making every penny of our Public Health grant work efficiently and effectively as well as drawing on 
defaultthe 
defaultwider Staffordshire public sector
default’
defaults resource.
defaultBut such a shift would need to reflect local priorities – 
defaultas a ‘top-down’ national shift could undermine local strategic efforts and force another round of expensive transformations which local trusts and local councils 
defaultcannot
default afford
default, in terms of both the cost involved and, perhaps more importantly, the distracti
defaulton from addressing the challenges facing us all.
default  
defaultInstead, there is a need to recognise that the integration we need to achieve reflects what local people expect and assume. Whilst we do not have quantifiable evidence
default,
default there is little distinction between 
defaultthe ‘out-patient’ ward and the care home for those concerned about an elderly relative, or the expectation of the person paying for their own care. 
defaultWhat is needed is a careful review of the law to ensure that whilst integration can be pursued, it isn’t undermined by expectations on either the NHS or Local Government which prevent them fully (but equally) engaging/investing in the process. 
defaultThe 
defaultwider 
defaulti
defaultssue of funding presents a variety of philosophical concepts that would, theoretically, draw together separate 
defaultstreams of resource
default. For example it could be argued that one-off interventions (such as elective surgery) should be funded by the NHS, but all on
default-going care jointly funded (as the aim is to maintain people at the highest possible level of care). 
defaultThis in turn would make notions such as 
defaultp
defaultooled 
defaultbudgets make sense at a local level, where the population is 300k-500k. However the logic of means testing 
defaultfor social care feels ever weaker, especially after the changes being brought in by the Care Bill.
default This would remove one of the major obstacles in the way of closer integration between health and social care.
defaultSo the issue is less of drawing together a meth
defaultod of combining current funds but focusing on how the funding and performance management systems need to operate to ensure that services focused on the individual perform accordingly. 
defaultThe current problem as we see it is that everyone agrees in principle w
defaultith the concept of integration, but lack a collective acceptance  of what that concept will look like in reality. Thus no one is 
defaultfully 
defaultaware of what they will lose or what demands will be placed on them from a shift towards integration
default, so the tendency is 
defaultto expect the worst
default. When we completed 
defaultthe Integrated Pioneers bid it was really clear that as organisations across Staffordshire 
defaultand
default 
defaultStoke we all were signed up to the principles of Integrated Care (person centred, seamless, co-ordinated care) but we hadn
default’t got a collective understanding of what that means for each partner
default’
defaults services. At the heart of this is a need to ensure that Health &amp; Social Care funding, if brought together, needs to come via the Commissioners of Health &amp; Social Care, not the provider
defaults. The focus on providers undermines an integrated model and approach and would require organisations such as NHS England to wean themselves off temporary solutions to systemic problems such as ‘winter pressures’
default.
default 
defaultMoreover if funding is brought together i
defaultt will force organisations to work together that haven’t before, 
defaultand 
defaultit will push the integration agenda
default,
default meaning that we have to look at integrated ways to 
defaultsecure
default 
defaultimproved health and wellbeing outcomes. This would require a level of co-ordination and agre
defaultement that would far exceed the strategic capacity of organisations like the Health and Wellbeing Board, and additionally 
defaultwould 
defaultpresent a quandary for previously powerful providers who would need to relinquish control. 
defaultAs organisations we each have our ow
defaultn priorities and each organisation has their own financial challenges
default. W
defaulthat we need to consider is all of this as one health and social care economy and then prioritise. We need to agree one Performance Framework for our Integration Agenda.
default&#xa0;
default This may mean 
defaultwe have a countywide approach with local implementation. The Integration Transformation Fund is introduced in 15/16 and there needs to be robust governance around the spending plans/commissioning intentions for this funding.
defaultSCC believes that the necessary
default funding shift required to ensure success with integration should move priorities as well as resources from acute
default services
default into the community, this means having smaller specialist acute services and much more local community provision offering choice for t
defaulthe individual.
defaultHowever, in terms of the wider impact of such a reprioritisation and the relationship of the individual to the state, we also need to consider the potential impact on primary care, General Practice and their role in terms of delivery of thes
defaulte integrated arrangements. What we cannot avoid is the need to align the delivery of primary care with our integrated approaches, but such an alignment would clearly present a challenge in terms of resources which primary care currently control and the nee
defaultd for a balance of total resources through the system. 
defaultFurthermore is the impact of integrated arrangements on the provision and role of the voluntary and community sector. Currently we see the VCS as a means of reducing demand on statutory services but a
defaultn integrated system needs to ensure fair access and treatment, but this can’t compromise the wider integration of services which need to remain focused on the individual. 
defaultWe fully recognise
default the difficulties and complexities associated with this issue. Nonetheless, we believe that the existing approach whereby theoretical allocations are calculated and then local areas are gradually moved towards them brings with it very significant disadvant
defaultages. On the one hand, areas that are well below their target may use this as an excuse not to address 
defaulttheir financial challenges as robustly as they might. On the other hand, the slow pace of movement towards target allocations means that those areas abov
defaulte their target feel only limited urgency to make the additional savings and redesign required to prepare them for that reduction. Finally, the complexity of the formula and the potential for target allocations to change significantly depending on the relat
defaultive weighting of different elements can result in local areas feeling as though the budget assigned to them has been determined almost randomly, which again undermines ownership of the figures and of the actions required to address financial pressures. 
defaultOur local experience, through the Mid-Staffordshire Inquiry alongside the Berwick and Keogh reviews has demonstrated the need for a step change in how we can organize and suppo
defaultrt local health institutions. 
defaultStaffordshire County Cou
defaultncil has suggested that part of the solution is the reorganisation of services to align with local priorities – identified through both the CCGs and the local Health and Wellbeing Strategy. 
defaultThis is bas
defaulted on the recognition that the traditional model of a small District General Hospital as a freestanding independent organisation is no longer sustainable and that the system needs to shift towards a network model, covering a larger footprint, with services
default deployed locally or centrally dependent upon demand and viability. This does require that quality of care be put before choice of provider.
defaultStaffordshire County Council is concerned 
defaultthat the current pressures which the NHS are facing could undermine the wider need for strategic reform. In particular, the repackaging of resources 
defaultto support transformation around the upcoming
default care bill, plus the £3.8bn set aside for integration could be at risk of these financial pressures meaning they are used to support 
defaultexisting 
defaultbudgets
default, rather than being used to facilitate transformation of care
default. 
defaultThe spending review has progressively pushed local authorities into a narrow focus on those individuals with the highest levels of ne
defaulted, and within that on reducing the unit cost of care packages. This has the potential to push in precisely the wrong direction, as it squeezes out preventative work with those on the cusp of care, thereby resulting in a vicious circle. The changes are pus
defaulthing councils towards the classic model of an ambulance at the bottom of the cliff, rather than a fence at the top.
defaultIn Staffordshire, our bold integration of adult social care services with community health services through the Staffordshire &amp; Stoke on Tre
defaultnt Partnership NHS Trust is designed precisely to address this challenge, by creating efficiencies through bringing services together that offer opportunities for a focus on prevention and early intervention.
defaultWe recognize that local authorities have an impact on provision, but the task is as much to recognise the need for partnership
default and alignment to ensure that local priorities influence the plans rather than the unilateral decisions of local authorities. 
defaultWithin Staffordshire our strategic approach can be summarised by the Health &amp; Wellbeing Strategy ‘Living Well in Staffordshire’. 
defaultAligned with this is the County Councils ‘Achieving Excellence in Public Health’ which reflects the following priorities:
defaultA key part of this is the provision of m
defaultore effective informatio
defaultn and advice 
defaultwhich 
defaultwill be provided so that people are clearer about where to go to access services, and be supported to make good choices
defaultCitizens will be supported to stay safe from avoidable health problems, for example, through screening and vaccinatio
defaultn
defaultIt is clear that at a strategic level there is alignment on bringing together the approaches of both local council and the Health Economy, so within Staffordshire there is an obvious fit for integration approaches. But a wider consideration is the questi
defaulton of addressing the needs of the individual and ensuring the right services are centred accordingly. Within SCC this approach leads to a challenge of formal boundaries either challenging them directly or ignoring them entirely. Such a concept takes integr
defaultation beyond a conceptual stage to a reality but the challenge remains how we can ensure that all partners focus on the individual
defaultO
defaultur own approach to integration c
defaultan be highlighted by the development of the Stoke-on-Trent &amp; Staffordshire Partnership 
defaultNHS 
defaultTrust
default (see appendix A)
default. Bringing together our social care and community health 
defaultprovision 
defaultpresents the early insight, experience and framework for the development of 
defaulta wider integrated approach to health and social care.
default 
defaultBroadly, there is a persistent expectation that 
defaulth
defaultealth 
defaultprovision is free at the point of access. 
defaultWhereas the
default Social Care
default system
default is means tested and is provided once a person is assessed and meets the eligibility criteria.
default Such a divided system being drawn together risks eroding these boundaries; either challenging the universal concept of health care or dramatically altering the c
defaulturrent approach to social care a
defaults summarised in the Care Bill. 
defaultPractically, free healthcare is dictated on the basis of current NICE guidelines and wider value for money judgements. A simplistic response would be to apply such a guidelines to social care,
default but the extent to which this would undermine the principles contained with the Care Bill and more widely the Dilnott recommendations would need to judge as well as the overall complexity and risk that social care as a function would be less about services
default delivered for the individual, and more about a massive expansion of the NHS.    
defaultFurthermore this would require a significant change in practice and time to embed the culture changes required to make this a reality.
default&#xa0;
default There would need to be robust workforc
defaulte development plans, and considerations in terms of the skill mix of staff would need to be consider
defaulted
default, as the role of professionals would potentially change too.
default&#xa0;
default We are already looking at joint risk management tools to identify at risk groups, and starti
defaultng to embed a risk management approach.
defaultMore widely, the Care Bill talks about ‘portability’ 
defaultdemonstrating that whilst integration remains intuitive and sensible it is complicated by the expectations placed on the local authority in terms of operational re
defaultquirements. Therefore the issue is as much the commitment of NHS through its approach to efficiencies, but also its wider strategic remit, to ensure that the savings made support the on-going integration of services. 
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
defaultAppendix A
defaultSTOKE-ON-TRENT &amp; STAFFORDSHIRE PARTNERSHIP NHS TRUST: defaultThe ageing population in Staffordshire – growing faster in Staffordshire compared to the national average - presents a variety of unprecedented health and social care challenges. The arrangements in pl
defaultace, Staffordshire County Council (SCC) knew had to change to build resilience into the system now and for the future, and so the Stoke-on-Trent and Staffordshire Partnership Trust was created, spearheaded by Director for People, Eric Robinson. This is the
default largest body of its kind in the UK with around 5,500 staff and a budget of £355 million (SCC transferring £153m and 1100 staff to the Trust). Taking an innovative and proactive approach to working across the sector with health partners, joining social car
defaulte and community health 
defaultservices, we are leading the country in meeting the government agenda, working in partnership to help our local people become healthier, happier and more supported in and by their community. 
defaultBenefits
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default