&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the Automobile Association (WRT 054)
default1. defaultIntroductiondefaultThe AA is the 
defaultUK
default’s largest motoring organisation
default.  
defaultIts
default President, Edmund King, Visiting Professor of Transport of 
defaultNewcastle
default University chairs the Department for Transport’s Motorists’ Forum.  The AA is very active stakeholder engaged in wide ranging policy and operational issues relating to 
defaultUK
default roads.
defaultThe AA keenly engages with its members.  
defaultAA members
default’
default views and compl
defaultaints 
defaultare obtained directly 
defaultvia telephone calls, letters and e-mails.  The AA 
defaultPopulus
default panel is the largest motoring opinion panel in 
defaultEurope
default and more than 20,
default000 respond to our monthly polls
default.
default  Questions on 
defaultUK
default roads feature regularly in the polls.
defaultAA members
default have differing views on many key motoring issues
default.  Most say that roads are in a fairly poor state and have not kept pace with traffic growth. Congestion and unreliable journeys are a significant concern for motorists and business. A majority of AA/
defaultPopulus
default panel members support the construction of new and improved roads.
default Motorists accept they mus
defaultt pay for their motoring but 
defaultresent b
defaulteing seen 
defaultas a ‘problem’ and 
defaultoppose
default escalating costs such as fuel, road tax, parking charges and pot
defaultential congestion charges. 
defaultP
defaultrivate motoring is an essential part of 21
defaultst
default century life and is something people continue to aspire to and even enjoy. Motoring is the main form of transport for 86% of passenger journeys.  
defaultMany people are dependent on the car and the mobility of the car
default benefits society in many ways.
default&#xa0;default2. Summarydefault&#xa0;
default3. defaultHow will the policies set out in the Government’s “Action for Roads” command paper improve the strategic road network for all road users, whilst adefaultlso improving the environment?defaultThe scale of the task required 
defaultto transform
default the quality, reliability and value to customers of strategic roads is enormous.  In our surveys people show concern for the lack of attention paid to roads our most valuable 
defaulttransport asset:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default- 
defaultin
default towns and cities
default,
default  67% agree (27% strongly), 11% disagree
default, 22% neither
default- 
defaulton
default main roads in rural areas
default, 66% agree (27% strongly),
default14% disagree
default, 20% neither
default- 
defaultto
default by-pass communities
default,
default  78% agree (37% strongly) 8% disagree
default, 15% neither 
default- 
defaultto
default make roads safer
default,
default  82% agree (42% strongly) 6% disagree
default, 13% neither
default&#xa0;
defaultThe new approach to strategic roads should provide scope for greater levels of investment which in turn could lead to schemes which enhance the environment through better quality quiet surf
defaultaces, better drainage and also allow more tunnels and community by-passes.  The popularity of and need for by-passes is often overlooked in road development today.  There is more emphasis on ‘making best use’ which is often really means there is no finance
default to do more than a minimum to keep roads maintained and functioning.    
default&#xa0;
defaultDespite expectations over many years that government policy and guidance would lead to a truly integrated transport system in 
defaultBritain
default it would be hard to describe the system as such. Much has been done to improve network quality and customer experience on 
defaultroad and rail and in cities but in many places transport remains a fragmented service.  This is perhaps unsurprising with most journeys being undertaken by road.  Cities and urban areas provide multi-faceted forms of transport with almost around the clock 
defaultaccess whereas in rural areas cars and roads remain a lifeline and the mainstay for most.
defaultOne problem in 
defaultBritain
default is the lack of proper interchanges between the modes at the most opportune places.  The problem is compounded on roads where different authorit
defaulties are responsible for national and local roads.  Problems on the Highways Agency network may 
defaultwell emanate from a local road which blocks access or egress to or from the national roads network.  Local authorities may also place a different priority on act
defaultions to resolve such issues.      
default&#xa0;defaultTraffic growth forecasts have in general 
defaulthelped predict like
defaultly future demand with sufficient accuracy to allow policy development.  Uncertainties will always exist but longer term trends have generally been reflected in the models. The problem is not so much the accuracy of the forecasts but the transformation of t
defaulthem into policies that lead to realistic capacity improvement.  Too many of our strategic roads run at or over design capacity – which suggests that for decades our predications may have been largely correct but our ability to provide for them in response 
defaulthas been inadequate. The models may place slightly too much faith in the success of interventions like demand management or public transport improvement.  It is also hard to build in the impact of real behaviour and response to political intervention and p
defaultolicy shifts.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn reality 
defaultwe cannot ignore the capacity constraints which exist on the strategic road network or believe we 
defaultcan deal with them through unrealistic interventions or expectations.  It is likely that traffic growth will continue for many decades and yet there is belief that ‘making best use’ and behavioural change will prevent ‘overheating’ of traffic demand.  Reli
defaultability and efficiency can be improved by relatively soft measures like traffic information, better traffic and incident management and behavioural change.  However, this must go hand in hand with long term planning for upgrading capacity.
defaultThe AA believes 
defaultthat managed motorways which utilise active traffic management techniques can play a major role in squeezing greater efficiency from key sections of English motorways.  However, we believe these techniques do not provide a long term solution to serious cap
defaultacity weaknesses.  The AA is very disappointed that the latest managed motorways will require the permanent conversion of the hard shoulder into a running lane.  AA members are very dubious about this and the Sunday Times featured the results of an AA 
defaultPopu
defaultlus
default poll (
defaulti
default) in an article on the 5 May 2013:
default&#xa0;
defaultWhilst hard economic times forced a review of capacity improvement costs which led to changes in managed motorway design there will be a need in the not too distant future for further capacity improvements on the sections of managed 
defaultmotorway implemented without hard shoulder.  The Highways Agency future congestion maps appear to confirm that some of these managed motorways will indeed be under stress again by 2025?           
default&#xa0;defaultThe AA
default considers that road users are the investors in the strategic roads network and provide an adequate revenue stream thro
defaultugh the tax they pay.  Whilst in the future fuel duties may decline because of improved fuel economy there will still be a significant surplus from fuel duty receipts.  Of course it is accepted that a significant proportion of motoring tax revenues are use
defaultd for the general exchequer and so we understand the need for supporting investment in England’s strategic roads from other means.    This does not extend to accepting the need for further fiscal input from road users through direct charges on some roads. 
default The AA opposes the proposal to charge drivers to use the A14 once it is upgraded, an AA 
defaultPopulus
default poll in 2012 (iii) found:
defaultAA members also rejected the idea of creating a roads utility – an AA 
defaultPopulus
default poll (ii) found:
default&#xa0;defaultThe Highways Agency has a relative
defaultly small strategic road network compared to others around the world. In fact it does not even operate roads in Scotland or Wales and yet those networks have a direct relationship with HA roads.  Whilst it is good to have ambitions for the HA to be the ‘
defaultwor
defaultlds
default leading road operator’ it will take time under its new remit to achieve this.  The HA can learn much from road authorities around the world but the HA strategic roads are quite unique.  The UK is densely populated with very heavy road traffic flows and
default HA roads critically link with numerous local authority roads over which it has no control.  The HA strategic network has developed relatively piecemeal with past political intervention leading to stop-go policies and many unresolved capacity problems.  In
default recent times the public has also been less enthusiastic to support major capacity improvements.
defaultThe redefined HA should seek to engage even better than at present and work to renew public interest in road development and improvement. 
default&#xa0;
default(
defaulti
default)  21,510 respons
defaultes to AA-
defaultPopulus
default Poll 15-19 April 2013
default(ii) 20,161 responses to AA-
defaultPopulus
default Poll 22-28 March 2012 
default(iii) 15,860 responses to AA-
defaultPopulus
default Poll 20-27 July 2011
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default