&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Steve Wilcox, 
defaultformerly Professor of Housing Policy, University of York
default 
default&#xa0;defaultLocal housing allowance reforms. defaultOverall numbers of claimants able to secure accommodation in the private rented sector has continued to increase, albeit as a slower rate. However numbers in inner London have declined, as have the numbers of lettings to single people aged under 35.  The s
defaulttandards of the ‘Shared Accommodation Rate’ is at odds with long standing housing policies 
defaultseeking to reduce the extent of houses in multiple accommodation. Sharing is also particularly problematic for more vulnerable single people. There is a welcome comm
defaultitment to review the operation of the CPI based uprating of LHA rates. This should be sooner rather than later.
default&#xa0;defaultThe Benefit CapdefaultThis 
defaultpolicy 
defaultis clearly at odds with the underlying structure of welfare benefits, where allowances vary to take into account bo
defaultth family size and variations in local housing costs. Like the LHA caps it has a much greater impact in London. Evidence from Haringey also shows that it is problematic for homeless households in temporary accommodation; and that most of those households w
defaultould not be impacted by the cap if rehoused with the benefit of a social sector rent. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBedroom Limits on eligible rents in the social rented sector  defaultThese are based on pre World War II environmental health standards. Overall social and housing standards 
defaulthave increased massively since then. In 1960 occupation at the bedroom standard was still 
defaultwidespread. 
defaultNow almost three quarters of all households occupy dwellings less intensively, and the ‘bedroom standard plus 1’ is the norm.
defaultFor many households there ar
defaulte health and disability factors that are not reflected in the bedroom limit regulations. While these may in the short term be dealt with by Discretionary Housing payments that is not an appropriate long term approach to enduring 
defaulthousehold 
defaultcircumstances. 
defaultT
defaulthe bedroom limit rules do not reflect differences in the size of bedrooms, and assumes they can always be occupied by two people even when many social sector dwellings were designed and built to include single bed space rooms.
defaultMany landlords do not have su
defaultfficient smaller stock to respond in a timely manner to household requests to downsize. Some have estimated that it would take seven or more years to meet the potential demand. There are also structural mismatches in local markets where there is no alterna
defaulttive demand for the dwellings that are currently being ‘under-occupied’. This is not something landlords in those areas can quickly fix.
defaultUniversal CreditsdefaultIn principle this is a welcome reform, as it removes the current confusing overlap between the tax 
defaultcredit and housing benefit schemes for working households.
defaultThere is, however, a key question about how the scheme can be best structured to deliver the ‘work pays’ message. As proposed the focus of the scheme is on a lower rate at which UC entitlement is t
defaultapered away as earnings rise. However this has a side effect of extending UC eligibility a very long way up the income scale – a couple with two children and a rent of £130 per week will be in receipt of UC at the same time as paying income tax at the 40% 
defaultrate.
defaultAn alternative approach would be to enhance the levels of earnings disregards, against a slightly higher taper rate. This would provide more effective incentives for lower paid households. It is also an approach that can be more readily used to promo
defaultte the work pays  message  ie  ‘You can earn £50/£100 before you will see any reduction in your benefit entitlement. You will always be better off in work’.
defaultThere is a case for including help with mortgage costs within the UC scheme. Concerns about costs f
defaultor providing assistance with home owners in low paid work will be effectively removed when the Department proceeds with its long term intention to provide that support as a recoverable loan.  
default&#xa0;defaultThe London QuestiondefaultIt has always been more expensive to provi
defaultde support for lower income households in London than in other parts of the country. The LHA and benefit cap reforms have deliberately sought to cut across that long term understanding, and is effectively aimed at reducing the proportions of lower income h
defaultouseholds able to live in London. There is a policy debate here about social diversity that goes far wider than benefit p
defaultolicy. There are also severe tensions between government benefit and housing and homeless policies.
defaultMore generally there are questions 
defaultabout the extent to which ‘one size fits all’ policies are appropriate across all the countries and regions of Great Britain.
default5 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default