&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Association of Directors of Public Health  (PHE001default3default)default&#xa0;
defaultThe Association of Directors of Public Health (ADPH) is the representative body for Directors of Public Health (
defaultDsPH
default) in the UK. It seeks to improve and protect the health of the population through DPH development, sharing good practice, and policy and advocacy programmes. 
defaultwww.adp
defaulth
default.org.u
defaultk
defaultDirectors of Public Health (
defaultDsPH
default) are the frontline leaders of public health working across the three domains of health improvement, health protection, and health care service planning and commissioning. 
defaultDsPH
default require a well-resourced and professional public health team providing the skills and experience to input to local service planning and commissioning, and to deliver Public Health programmes and advice across the health economy, supported by access to high quality local and national data and scientific evidence base. 
defaultADPH has a strong track record of collaboration with other stakeholders in public health, including those working within the NHS, local authorities, government and other sectors. 
defaultADPH submitted detailed responses to consultation exercises related to the Health &amp; Social Care Bill and development of the Public Health system in England; and has submitted evidence to a number of Health Select Committee inquiries and to the APPG on Primary Care &amp; Public Health. 
defaultThe ADPH President, Dr Janet Atherton, contributes to a range of key national groups continuing to develop and refine the new public health system in England, and contributed to the recent PHE Stakeholder Research exercise (
defaultIpsos
default MORI, August 2013).
default&#xa0;
defaultOverview and summarydefaultADPH has worked closely with PHE to develop both the structures (national and local) and effective working relationships that are vital to the success of the public health system in England. In particular, detailed work was undertaken with the HPA and subsequently PHE to develop solutions to key local health protection issues, including: Infection Prevention &amp; Control; Out of Hours arrangements for health protection; and emergency preparedness and response.
defaultWe have welcomed the real engagement and inclusiveness demonstrated at national level by PHE, including:
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would however concur with the findings of the recent PHE Stakeholder Research, that there is still more to achieve in relation to PHE’s role at regional and local level. Further work is needed to strengthen effective relationships with local government – however lack of co-
defaultterminosity
default between PHE (and NHSE) and local government brings additional challenges which will need to be addressed. 
defaultOverall, we would commend the progress made by PHE through the transition and the first few months of operation. Below we highlight some specific issues that we hope will be useful to Public Health England as it continues to develop; and we welcome the opportunity to continue to work with PHE in support of a strong and resilient public health system for England.
defaultParticular issues for PHE moving forwarddefaultCommunications:default Robust communications (including early notification of new initiatives/roll-out of population-based activity) to Directors of Public Health and their teams and to local government in general, will support stronger working relationships both nationally and locally. 
defaultRelationships:default Effective working relationships locally between Directors of Public Health/their teams in local government, PHE Centres, NHSE LATs and CCGs are critical to making the system work effectively. These components of the system are still ‘bedding down’ and some are not yet fully staffed (see ‘capacity’ below) – and we are aware that to date the establishment of good and effective working relationships does vary across England. 
defaultThe key concept envisioned by PHE nationally - of all elements working together and within one public health system - is very much supported by ADPH. However as indicated above, there is still more work to be done to ensure this concept is adopted and applied across the organisation.
default&#xa0;defaultCapacity to deliver regionally/locally:default reduced capacity due to unfilled posts (within not just PHE, but also NHSE and 
defaultDsPH
default/local government) is of continuing concern and raises issues for building and assuring a safe and resilient system. 
defaultThrough transition there has been, and indeed continues to be, significant movement within the public health workforce across England – with each element of the local public health system effectively competing for staff within a limited pool.
defaultADPH has highlighted concerns that the loss of local public health capacity and capability will seriously risk the success of the new system.
default defaultSuccession planning for 
defaultDsPH
default and other senior PH professionals; and ensuring seamless career pathways for Public Health professionals to move between organisations (e.g. local government/PHE/NHS), will be vital to support the long term success of the public health system, and to ensure current and future PH expertise and capacity for PHE, public health in local authorities, and the NHS. 
defaultThe workforce development role of PHE is therefore critical to ensuring a strong and resilient public health system now and into the future.
defaultAccess to information:default Public health data and information (across all relevant population levels); surveillance and monitoring; and real-time data flows for detection of health protection threats &amp; response, must all be maintained and be easily and rapidly accessible to PH staff working in local authorities and across the local systems. 
defaultADPH members have appreciated continuing efforts to resolve issues that have emerged in relation to access to patient data and non-patient identifiable data for local authority based public health intelligence teams, and have highlighted the importance of sufficient PHE resources being made available to ensure an appropriate technical solution is in place to efficiently deliver such data to all public health intelligence teams based in local authorities across England.
defaultScreening and immunisation services:default ADPH has welcomed the joint work by PHE and NHSE on a 
defaultstocktake
default of the new commissioning and system leadership arrangements for screening and immunisation services – however we believe that it is important that a ‘whole system’ approach is applied and that therefore the 
defaultstocktake
default process should be widened to include the role of Local Authorities and CCGs in screening and immunisation services – particularly important given the key/statutory assurance role of Local Authorities. 
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default