&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Novartis Pharmaceuticals UK Limited (PHE001default5default)default&#xa0;defaultFunding for the National Haemoglobinopathy Registry (NHR)default&#xa0;
defaultNovartis Pharmaceuticals has a long-term commitment to developing treatments for iron overload in people with haemoglobinopathies (red cell disorders such as sickle cell disease and thalassaemia major). We are keen to contribute more generally to improving outcomes for patients with this type of disease and are therefore taking this opportunity to highlight an important public health issue to the Committee – the lack of adequate long-term funding for the National Haemoglobinopathies Registry.
default1.0default&#xa0; 
defaultExecutive SummarydefaultThe public health benefits of having a long-term patient registry are:
defaultThe above can only be achieved if the registry is properly funded both now and in the futuredefault – long-term annual patient reviews are vital in achieving accurate outcome data, including diagnosis, treatment and complications, as well as real time reporting of adverse events, such as deaths, stroke, sepsis and emergency admission, that can then inform planning of services to improve health outcomes.
default2.0default              defaultIntroduction to the NHRdefaultAmongst PHE’s responsibilities is researching, collecting and analysing data to improve understanding of health and address public health problems.
defaultThe National Haemoglobinopathy Registry (NHR) is a consented database of UK patients with red cell disorders (sickle cell and thalassaemia) containing details of almost 6,500 
defaultpatients.
default The NHR collects information on diagnosis, treatment and risk factors for disease complications such as use of iron chelation therapy. The database also collects information on causes of death. The database is only available on the secure NHS intranet to clinicians who register their centre and is managed by the Steering Group of the NHR.
defaultThe central aim of the database is to improve patient care across the UK by providing invaluable anonymous information to Haemoglobinopathy centres and specialist commissioners in order to improve services. This data is essential for healthcare planning, identifying patient numbers and research into improved treatment methods. Any data used for these purposes is presented as anonymous group-reports and cannot be traced back to individual patients.
defaultTo summarise, the NHR system provides three separate services: the 
defaultNHR public Internet website
default, the NHR secure database, which provides an easy way for Sickle Cell and Thalassaemia clinicians and centres to record information about their patients, and finally the NHR secure Information Service, which provides anonymous summary information to treatment centres and commissioners.
default3.0default              defaultCurrent Situation and Moving ForwarddefaultSince April 2013 the NHR has been funded by specialist commissioning from PHE but we understand that there is currently no guaranteed funding for next year, or any subsequent years. The inclusion of references to the registry in the service specification
default may be reversed and even if they stay in this does not guarantee adequate, sustainable, future funding of the NHR. The service specification will only guarantee that the data is collected and not what happens to it afterwards. Indeed the NHR currently receives significantly less funding than 
defaultregistries for comparable diseases, such as haemophilia. 
defaultIn order to transform the NHR into a sustainable registry that is as effective as the Haemophilia registry requires a commitment from PHE to long-term funding to provide stability and scope for further improvements as well as the opportunity for annual patient reviews and delivery of more accurate patient outcome data.defaultThe public health benefits of having a long-term registry are:
defaultCurrently, the viability of the NHR is under threat due to this uncertainty about future funding and we would therefore defaultlike to encourage the Health Select Committee to hold Public Health England to account for the provision of adequate and long-term funding for the register to foster research into haemoglobinopathies and improve patient outcomes in line with its core responsibilities.defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default http://www.nhr.nhs.uk/
default NHS England: Service Specification for Specialised Haemaglobinopathies Care (All ages). Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.england.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/b08-speci-serv-haemo.pdf
default, accessed on 7 November 2013
default