&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault Ricardo UK Ltddefault (GHS0016)defaultRicardo is a leading independent provider of innovative technology, engineering services and strategic consulting to the world’s automotive, transport and energy industries.    
defaultRicardo was the Project Coordinator for the European Commission project Safe Ro
defaultad Trains for the Environment (SARTRE).   This EU FP7 research project delivered a prototype vehicle platoon system using two heavy goods vehicles and three passenger cars, with one of the trucks leading the convoy.  
defaultRicardo is also the leader of a consor
defaulttium including TRL which won a recent Department for Transport tender on a Feasibility Study for Heavy Vehicle Platoons on UK Roads.  This feasibility study will also include a technology review and the development of a work specification for roads trials 
defaultof HGV platooning on UK motorways.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat are (or were) the policy challenges presented by this technology? 
defaultLevels of automation
defaultThe term “autonomous vehicle” covers a wide range of automated vehicle technologies ranging from automated parking to a fully a
defaultutonomous vehicle operating under all conditions and not requiring any (short-term) human intervention.  A number of organisations, 
defaultBASt (Bundesanstalt für Straßenwesen) in Germany and 
defaultNHTSA (National Highway Traffic Safety Adminstration) in the USA, have 
defaultalready started to classify these technologies and define the different levels of vehicle automation.
default&#xa0;
defaultL
defaultevels of
default automation need to be defined
default to create an agreed EU-wide set of definitions.  
defaultT
defaulthese definitions will help to frame 
defaultall subsequent 
defaultpolicies
default on 
defaultautomated vehicles
default.
defaultLiability
defaultAt present, liability rests with the (human) driver.  With an automated vehicle, liability could rest with the vehicle owner / keeper, the vehicle driver / operator, the manufacturer, the driver of another vehicle (e.g. in pla
defaulttooning system)
default, etc
default.  Regulations 
defaultto define
default the responsibilities 
defaultof the different parties 
defaultare required.
defaultL
defaultGV Driver’s Hours
defaultThe driving and working hours of commercial vehicle
default driver
defaults is highly regulated.  If a L
defaultGV driver is part of an automated platoon, and is not required to actively control the vehicle, the regulations need to be updated to clarify how this time should be classified.  
defaultThis could potentially extend the 
default4.5+4.5 hour 
defaultdaily 
defaultlimit and therefore incr
defaultease the daily 
defaultrange of the vehicle.  
defaultAt present, in the case of multi-manning where there are several drivers in the vehicle, the non-driving driver’s time is not considered as “driving” but 
defaultis 
defaultconsidered as either “rest” or “POA (Period Of Availability)”
default.
defaultThe physical, legislative and interface requirements on how the platooning system should work with the tachograph need to be defined to enforce the safe and legal operation of the 
defaultvehicles
default.
default  The operational aspects of platooning such as enforcement, effe
defaultcts on driver of leading a platoon, etc. need to be investigated.
defaultLegislation
defaultCurrent legislation is based on the 1968 Vienna Convention and the “
defaultdriver shall at all times be able to control his vehicle
default”.  For automated vehicle technology to be introduced 
defaultto the market, the legislation must be updated to cater for different levels of drivers being “in the loop”
default, recognising that different rules may apply for the range of levels of automation
default.
defaultIn the first instance, the regulations to allow approved organis
defaultations to develop and test their prototype systems on public roads is required.  Although 
defaultdevelopment and 
defaulttesting will start on private test tracks, tests in real-world environments on public roads is essential to develop mature, robust systems
default that are su
defaultitable for commercial introduction
default.
defaultAt a later date, regulations for commercial introduction of such technologies are required.
defaultOverview of SARTRE project
default – “Safe Road Trains for the Environment”
defaultThe SARTRE project is a European Union FP7 project which d
defaultevelops strategies and technologies to allow vehicle platoons to operate on normal public highways with significant environmental, safety and comfort benefits.  The basic assumptions are that SARTRE platoons will operate on public highways, shared with oth
defaulter non-platoon traffic, and that no changes to the road infrastructure will be required.
defaultThe project was led by Ricardo and has brought together the skills and expertise of 7 partners from 4 countries: Applus+ IDIADA, Institut für Kraftfahrzeuge Aachen (ik
defaulta), Ricardo, SP Technical Research Institute of Sweden, Tecnalia, Volvo Cars, Volvo Technology.
defaultThe overall concept of SARTRE is to have a group of vehicles driving together with a lead vehicle, driven normally by a trained professional driver, and several
default following vehicles driven fully automatically by the system with small longitudinal gaps between them.  Driving in this way in a platoon brings benefits in fuel consumption, safety and driver convenience.  
defaultThe demonstration system has been successfully t
defaultested on test tracks and public motorways, and demonstrated to industry stakeholders as well as members of the press.  Using these vehicles, the fuel consumption benefits of platooning have been measured, showing gains of up to 16% for the following vehicl
defaultes and 8% for the lead vehicle.
defaultAlthough there remain technical and regulatory challenges before a commercial implementation of SARTRE can be available, the project has successfully demonstrated platooning technology based to a large extent on existing 
defaulttechnologies which can be implemented on existing highways without any additions to the road infrastructure.
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default