&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence from defaultMatthew Grove, Police and Crime Commissioner for Humbersidedefault [CST0009]default&#xa0;
defaultMany thanks for affording me the opportunity to submit written evidence in relation to your inquiry into 
defaultcrime
default statistics.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis inquiry is timely as Police and Crime Commissioners are one-year into their roles in holding their Chief Constable to account for the delivery of pol
defaulticing on behalf of the public.  
defaultThis inquiry must consider the impact of this signi
defaultficant 
defaultdevelopment.  It should take into account the 
defaultimprovement in local accountability
default,
default and the transparency
default, contextualisation
default and timeliness of information to the public 
defaultby Police and Crime Commissioners, 
defaultespecially when 
defaultcompared to 
defaultthe time-lag in pub
defaultlishing national statistics which generally have
default little in the way of local context.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion 1: Are crimes being recorded by the police when they should be? Are crimes being categorised correctly?default&#xa0;
defaultWe have all seen the 
defaultcontinued 
defaultreductions in recorded cr
defaultime over the last several years and the ‘gap’ between recorded crime statistics and the crime survey results.  This ‘gap’ is arguably one of the reasons behind some of the dissatisfaction we hear 
defaultfrom the public 
defaultabout published crime statistics.
default&#xa0;
defaultLocally, 
defaultthis ‘gap’ has been relatively small and consistent over the years due to the ethical approach adopted
default locally, following the National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS) 
defaultto the letter
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat has 
defaultnot
default happened over this period is a 
defaultproper and informed 
defaultdebate 
defaultabout the victi
defaultms ‘needs’ and a more common-
defaultsense approach to recording for certain crime categories.  For example, there is a tendency to 
default‘
defaultcrime
default’
default criminal damage or 
defaultthe 
defaultmore minor 
default‘
defaultviolent
default’
default incidents when the victim 
defaultmay 
defaultmerely want some form of restorativ
defaulte solution 
defaultand
default does not feel a crime has been committed.  Police officers are not always afforded 
defaultthis kind of 
defaultdiscretion
default and 
defaultthe NCRS rules 
defaultsometimes 
defaulttake an element of this away from them.
default&#xa0;
defaultLocally, we have tended to take a risk-averse approach to the re
defaultcording of crime.  This has arguably been a contributory factor in our higher levels of crime when compared to our peers.  This makes comparison difficult, but also raises the question over
default whether it is possible or even necessary to have national comparat
defaultive statistics, especially as the focus of Police and Crime Commissioners is 
defaultpredominantly 
defaulton local provision.  It also raises the question over whether a national standard for crime recording
default should continue to be 
defaultviewed as achievable or even necessary.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe other thing we have to remember with recorded crime statistics is that whilst the ‘traditional’ crimes (burglary, vehicle crime, and so on) are falling, fraud is replacing such crimes as the offence of choice for an increasing number of 
defaultoffenders
default.  The
default clear message needs to be that whilst
default other reported crime decreases,
default fraud in the 
defaultUK
default is growing.  We also know that a large volume of fraud remains unreported, due to a number of factors such as victimisation of vulnerable and hard 
defaultto reach groups, and w
defaulte do not know the full scale of the threat and its impact on 
defaultour 
defaultlocal communities.  By focusing on ‘traditional’ crime recording, we are al
defaultso in fear of putting
default our resources 
defaultnot
default in the places where they are most needed and will reap 
defaultthe greatest benefit 
defaultto victims and our communities.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt terms of the categorisation of crimes, my 
defaultbiggest
default concern is in relation to elements of violent crime.  The category of violent crime 
defaultwithout injury
default can at times be a ‘catch all’.  Although it is right that we 
defaultsomehow ca
defaultpture minor assaults, as they could be an indicator of escalating activity by a person, whether we should 
default‘
defaultmix
default’
default these incidents in with 
defaultall
default violent crime is questionable.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is a further anomaly around violent crime.  Locally we are viewed as having on
defaulte of the highest levels of recorded violent crime and yet a very low homicide level.  This undermines the validity of the data to some extent and an overall high rate of violent crime doesn’t display the local context, where we 
defaultdon’t
default have a culture of more
default serious and gun crime that you see in other areas of the country.
default  People make the incorrect assumption that they live in a violent place according to the statistics, whereas the reality is somewhat different in most parts of Humberside.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion 2: Whatdefault are the factors which can influence police mis-recording of crime?default&#xa0;
defaultFollowing on from Question 1, they key issue 
defaultis the time-frame for criming.
default&#xa0;
defaultI believe 
defaultwe need to 
defaultquestion whether the police are sometimes too quick to crime an incident before taking in
defaultto account the victims wishes and feelings.  The NCRS rules have to some extent taken away the common-sense element of policing.  There is no doubt in my mind that recording rules are a necessity, but we need to look 
defaultpotentially 
defaultat a ‘cooling off’ period 
defaultf
defaultor certain crime types and 
defaultthe ability for discretion by police officers to take what they consider to be an appropriate response (which might not include criming), 
defaultwhilst 
defaultultimately record what is right after taking 
defaultsuch 
defaulttime and accounting for the victim
defaults needs.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe removal of the target culture has 
defaultundoubtedly 
defaulthelped in reducing the possibility 
defaultof 
default‘gaming’ by 
defaultofficers categorising crime
defaults
default incorrectly, e.g. criming a dwelling burglary as a theft from dwelling when they may have reached their ‘quota’ of dw
defaultelling burglaries for the month.  This type of activity must be discouraged and the removal of a target culture helps in this respect.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, the over reliance on quantitative data combined with simplistic and inappropriate centrally set targets in 
defaultthe past has, in my opinion, 
defaultcorrupted policing and led to perverse outcomes, devoid of common sense that has undermined public confidencedefault.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion 3: Are the right checks in place to ensure that the systems for recording crime functiondefaultsdefault effectively and accurately?default&#xa0;
defaultThe Police and Crime Commissioners are there to hold their Chief Constable to account on behalf of the public.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe question we need to ask is whether public perception of crime recording reflects the reality.  It is important
default that systems are in place locally and that they are effective for local circumstances.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn Humberside, as part of my Police and Crime Plan, I will be rolling out mobile technology to ensure officers are visible in our local neighbourhoods
default and
default in the place
defaults where they are most required.  We need to
default recognise the risks in rolling-
defaultout such technology
default, 
defaultensuring the correct impact on crime recording, consistency and the use of common-sense by officers to individual situations.
default&#xa0;
defaultI am aware of the work by Her Maj
defaultesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC) around data integrity.  This relies on a limited sample and doesn’t fully take into account the work undertaken by local Crime Registrars
default in their audits, findings and learning points.  This local element to me is
default important to 
defaultensure that 
defaultour
default systems locally are as effective and accurate as they can be.  We need to create an atmosphere where we do things right for the victim in the first instance and correct any issues 
defaultquickly 
defaultif things do not go as expected.
default&#xa0;
defaultI wi
defaultll give an example where it could be questioned whether crimes are being recorded accurately.  Locally we have a high incidence of criminal damage (a crime) and a low incidence of anti-social behaviour (an incident).  It could be argued that we have taken 
defaulta risk-averse approach to recording, hence the high-level of criminal damage.  Less risk-averse approaches could produce a more 
default‘
defaultbalanced
default’
default level of crimes and incidents.  Our approach indicates that we could be over-recording criminal damage, although our 
defaultdata integrity audits show that NCRS compliance is excellent, i.e. we’re 
defaultnot
default over-recording.  
defaultBut this raises two questions: (i) whether othe
defaultrs are following a similar line
default and (ii) 
defaultthe 
defaultcomparability of figures between forces.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion 4: Has enough been defaultdone to ensure the integrity of crime data? What more should be done?default&#xa0;
defaultSee answer 3 above.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion 5: To what extent can policy-makers have confidence in the statistics which result from the recording of crime by police forces?default&#xa0;
defaultIt is important for 
defaultPolice and Crime Commissioners to have confidence in the
defaultir
default statistics locally in order to hold to account the Chief Constable on behalf of the public.  This is impo
defaultrtant for me at a local level.
default&#xa0;
defaultI 
defaultam 
defaultuncertain as to the level of confidence within other po
defaultlice forces and the ability for national policy-makers to have confidence in this data.  However, the duties of the Police and Crime Commissioner are clear
default,
default and if they are undertaken adequately then confidence in the data should be high.
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestion 6: Shoudefaultld recorded crime statistics be classified as National Statistics?default&#xa0;
defaultIt is important that the statistics are accurate at a local level as part of my statutory duties.  
defaultThe focus on local solutions through local statistics must be the way forward in the firs
defaultt instance.
default&#xa0;
defaultI believe that the National Statistics can be unrepresentative of the local picture.  In addition, the Office of National Statistics (ONS) now tend to produce quarterly figures which are devoid of context and tend to merely restate th
defaultose
default figures presented to them in the first 
defaultinstance
default.  This is due in part to the risk-averse nature of crime statistics publications.  However, the ONS has produced guidance on the publication of local data which is useful to follow.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also need to bear in 
defaultmind that we should all move away from the current culture of the recorded crime data being seen as the ‘result’ which is then often used as the stick.  We need to move to a place where the figures are used as ‘guidance’, for what they tell us as part of a
defaultn overall holistic assessment of performance.  This includes a mixture of local qualitat
defaultive as well as quantitative data
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultFinally, we need to publish statistics with con
defaulttext and in a manner which incentivises 
defaultpeople 
defaultto 
defaultreporting and/or forces 
defaultto 
defaultrecord.  
defaultThe clearest examples are the increasing rates of sexual crime and 
defaultdomestic violence that are evident throughout many parts of the country at present.  Such rises are depicted by the media and others as failure, whereas what they actually demonstrate is su
defaultccess through partnership working and the increase in the confidence of victims to report the crime by the variety of means we make available to them.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe more serious crimes tend to be grossly underreported and we must make all efforts to encourage repor
defaultting of such crimes.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default