&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Mr Gary PowelldefaultFurther submission to the CLG Commitdefaulttdefaultee in respect of its inquiry into the work of the Local Government Ombudsman.defaultThis submission is a response to the following request from the Clerk of the Communities and Local Government Committee, received on 6 
defaultNovember 2013:
default“
defaultThank you for your submission in response to the Committee’s further inquiry into the work of the Local Government Ombudsman.
default&#xa0;
default The Committee has considered it and have asked me to write to you.
default&#xa0;
default You make a number of assertions about the Ext
defaulternal Review of the LGO carried out last year by Richard Thomas CBE, Jim Martin and Dr Kirkham of Sheffield University, specifically that it lacked independence and objectivity and was an “adulatory whitewash”. Furthermore, you make allegations that the pr
defaultocess was dominated by Dr Kirkham, whom you describe as a “propagandist” for the LGO. These are serious allegations which from the contents of your submission and from the 2005 article you cite do not appear to be supported by detailed evidence. Before dec
defaultiding what action to take in respect of your submission, the Committee would be grateful for a further submission setting out in detail your evidence to 
defaultsubstantiate these contentions.”
defaultThe fact that the Committee has writte
defaultn to me stating
default that they 
defaultbeliev
defaulte 
defaultmy accusations of an External R
defaulteview whitewash and of Dr Kirkham being a pro-LGO propagandist “
defaultdo not appear to be supported by detailed evidence” 
defaultin my submission
default, is a matter of some surprise:
default both to me, and to my successor as Director of Local Govern
defaultment Ombudsman Watch. In both 2005 and 2012, both the current Director and I sent the 
defaultCLG 
defaultCommittee, and its predecessor, submissions in which we accused the LGO of being a biased and dishonest organisation that deliberately deceived the public and manipul
defaultated statistics. Neither the current Director nor I received any request from the Committee in response to those submissions claiming that our assertions were not “supported by detailed evidence” and requesting further submi
defaultssions setting out in detail fur
defaultther
default evidence to substantiate our contentions. 
defaultThe contentions we made in the 2005 and 2012 submissions about LGO bias, dishonesty and general maladministration were surely no less “
defaultserious allegations” 
defaultthan my accusation that the External R
defaulteview has been
default an “adulatory whitewash” and that Dr Kirkham is a “propagandist” for the LGO
default,
default yet, as I have said, I was not asked for any further submission to set out in detail my allegations then. I therefore wonder what is so different in this case. Perhaps it was th
defaulte case that the Committee felt that the allegations I made in my 2005 and 2012 submissions were already well substantiated by the evidence I had provided. However, if this is the case, then one must ask why the Committee did not take the accusations seriou
defaultsly and has all but ignored the evidence provided by LGO Watch over the course of 
defaultalmost 
defaulta decade: in particular, 
defaultevidence of 
defaultthe manipulation by the LGO of the Ipsos-MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey data, and the fact that the survey results were still d
defaultamning of the LGO even after the manipulation had taken place. 
defaultThe submission I have recently submitted is the first one in which I have expressed criticism of the Committee itself; and I remain convinced that the Committee shares 
defaultresponsibility for the w
defaultay the LGO has been allowed to betray the good citizens of this country with impunity, supported by taxpayer
default funding. The Committee remains
default the only institution that could properly call the LGO to account, and its inaction and unwillingness to 
defaulttreat with 
defaultproper 
defaultrespect 
defaultand seriousness 
defaultthe compelling evidence presented to it by concerned citizens 
defaultstruggling to make their discoveries and experiences heard, 
defaulthas been lamentable. 
defaultIt is not the job of private citizens to do the work of the CLG Committee: the co
defaultre members of LGO Watch have already spent a colossal amount of time and energy on gathering evidence and 
defaulton 
defaulttrying to encourage politicians to listen to it and penetrate the carapace of political indifference and collusion; and we do not have a fraction o
defaultf the time or resources available to either the LGO or the Committee.
defaultIn my 
defaultprevious submission, there is sufficient
default 
defaultprima facie
default evidence that the External Review was a whitewash and that Dr Kirkham’s enthusiasm for the LGO, and his damage-limitation inter
defaultvention following the aborted 2005 evidence session, marked him out as an individual whose colours as a sympathiser with the LGO as it currently exists
default,
default were firmly nailed to the mast, and who was therefore a totally inappropriate person to have been selec
defaultt
defaulted to carry out an independent External R
defaulteview of the LGO. The Committee is in a position to investigate the quality and extent of Dr Kirkham’s historical relationship with the LGO, and whether
default he was likely to approach the R
defaulteview from a neutral and objec
defaulttive perspective. All I can do is point to the evidence in his 2005 
defaultpublication – including both what he said, and what he did not say -
default 
defaultand just as import
defaultantly, point to the context of 
defaulthis publication. If the Committee is minded to ignore 
defaultprima facie
default evid
defaultence provided by a private citiz
defaulten who does not share
default its 
defaultextensive 
defaultresources to investigate, then there is little more I can do. 
defaultA Committee that is genuinely concerned
default that
default an external review of the LGO be truly independent should surely be at 
defaultleast a l
defaultittle concerned that the very
default individual whose contributions clearly dominated the Review ["Richard Kirkham undertook the bulk of the research and drafting of this Report for which his colleagues are most grateful." (p4)] is the only 
defaultnon-LGO employee
default on th
defaulte LGO 
defaultWatch website with his own page:
defaulthttp://ombudsmanwatchers.org.uk/articles/friends_of_the_lgo.htmldefault defaultDr Kirkham’s page 
defaultis 
defaultentitled, 
default“Friends
default of the LGO: Dr Richard Kirkham
default,” and
default 
defaultit
default was set up in 2009, therefore long before he was commissioned by the LGO to conduct the External Review. Not only this, but I have discovered there is also a whole page 
defaulton the Local Government Ombudsman Discussion Forum 
default(no connection with LGO Wa
defaulttch) 
defaulthttp://www.amv3.com/forum/index.php
default 
defaultdedicated to Dr Kirkham, with posts dating from 2007, (searchable under “Kirkham”). This is 
defaultclear 
defaultevidence that Dr Kirkham has been considered for several years by
default LGO Watch supporters 
defaultand other critics of the LGO 
defaultto be a pro-LGO propagandist who, for reasons best known to himself, chooses to disregard and dismiss evidence of LGO bias presented by real complainants, and to present the LGO to the public, as an appare
defaultntly impartial academic, in a way that 
defaultdoes an injustice both to
default the facts 
defaultreadily 
defaultat his disposal
default, and to the potential to gather facts from real complainants
default. He has been regarded as a pro-LGO propagandist by LGO Watch activists since he came to our attention in 
default2005 on the publication of his article, 
default“A Complainant's View of the 
defaultLocal Government Ombudsman,”
default defaultpublished in the “Journal of Social Welfare and Fami
defaultly Law,” Volume 27, Issue 3-4, pp. 383-394, in December 2005.
defaultDr Kirkham’s article was published 
defaultsubsequent to
default the ODPM Committee Evidence Session where, for the first time in the history of the LGO, the institution was facing ques
defaulttions as to its impartial
defaultity,
default honesty
default and efficacy
default. LGO Watch had been set up in 2003, and we provided detailed evidence 
defaultto the Committee 
defaultof how complainants to the LGO were being treated unfairly, and of how the LGO was manipulating its Customer Satisfaction Surveys
default, whose result
defaults were still nonetheless 
defaultquite damning of the LGO, even after they had been manipulated. On the morning of the Se
defaultlect Committee evidence session on 
default15 March 2005,
default 
defaultJad Adams
default’s
default 
default“
defaultThunderer
default”
default column
default was published in the Times,
default criticising the LGO 
defaulthttp://thetim.es/RfRqGd
default. The LGO hit back with a PR campaign, and on 26 April 2005, a sympathetic interview with the Ombudsman was published in the Times 
defaulthttp://thetim.es/Re3Xya
default. 
defaultThen came Dr Kirkham’s article in December, which 
defaultto the astonishment of LGO Watch, 
defaultbore the title
default, “A Complainant’s View of the Local Government Ombu
defaultdsman.
default” 
defaultWe were astonished because
default Dr Kirkham gave absolutely no indication in his article that he had eve
defaultr been a complainant to the LGO, and absolutely no indication that he had even spoken to any complainants to the LGO in order to find out their perspective. 
defaultThe title of his article bore the
default clear
default hallmarks of 
defaultbelonging to 
defaultthe LGO’s 2005 damage limitation
default exercise: it was complainants who had provided the evidence to the Committee of LGO maladministration and dishonesty, and now Dr Kirkham had published a sympathetic article on the LGO in which he claimed to represent the perspective of complainants, when 
defaultin fact 
defaulthe was not one, when he casually dismissed the evidence provided by real complainants to the Committee, and when he did not make any effort to contact any real complainants at LGO Watch to ask for our perspective for the purposes of researching his
default article. His contribution was one that clearly fell far below acceptable standards of academic objectivity. Not only that, but where in his article Dr Kirkham did refer to evidence that we as complainants had provided to the Committee, 
defaultthat was 
defaultpublished 
defaultin the ODPM Committee’s report, he did so selectively, completely ignoring the detailed analysis of and commentary on the MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey that we had provided to the Committee. Surely any academic claiming to write an objective article fr
defaultom the perspective of a complainant should have taken a close interest in the very instrument that had provided evidence of 
defaultcomplainants’ views: 
defaultthe MORI Customer Satisfaction S
defaulturvey, and the analysis of it provided in the LGO Watch submission. Instead, th
defaultis is glossed over, and Dr Kirkham dismisses the accusations made by real complainants to the Committee by making various unfounded blanket assumptions about them in time-honoured straw man par
defaultadigm fashion, which I shall explore below
default. 
defaultIn Dr Kirkham’s 20
default05 article, he makes reference to the 
defaultevidence from
default dissatisfied complainants 
defaultpublished 
defaultby the ODPM Committee following the 2005 Evidence Session on the Role and Effectiveness of the LGO. He is clearly aware of the 
defaultevidence presented by LGO Watch and our 
defaultsupporters of LGO bias and maladministration
default, and refers to my submission in his
default ar
defaultticle, so it is a reasonable assumption that he read it.
default It was a requirement that those submitting evidence 
defaultto the Committee 
defaultdid not focus on the 
defaultcontent and detail
default of thei
defaultr individual complaints, and that they instead presented a wider, more general picture of 
defaultsystemic and procedural
default concerns. Several LGO Watch supporters had their submissions rejected because they did not meet this requirement. The LGO Watch submission was
default focused on evidence that the LGO was biased in favour of local authorities, and that its MORI Customer Satisfaction Survey indicated an alarmingly high rate of customer dissatisfaction with the LGO’s service that was even shared by 50% of those 
defaultwhose comp
defaultlaints were successfully upheld by the LGO. The LGO Watch submission also focused on strong evidence that the LGO had manipulated the process of the Survey, whose outcome would have been even more damning of the LGO if this manipulation had not taken place
default. 
defaultDr Kirkham decided to make no reference to this crucial evidence in the LGO Watch submission, despite there being a strong case to answer. Not only this, but in his 2005 article, he says:
default“There has never been any serious allegation that the LGO act in 
defaultany other way but according to the highest standards of public conduct.”
default (ibid
default.
default, p 388).
defaultThis is surely an extraordinary thing to say. In this one sentence, Dr Kirkham dismisses the detailed evidence provided to the Committee of LGO bad practice as not bei
defaultng “serious”. So not only does he not bother to hear the views of real complainants – intelligent private citizens who had gone to great lengths to provide objective evidence, and who, unlike Dr Kirkham, were real complainants to the LGO – but he 
defaultalso 
defaultchoo
defaultses to dismiss our experience and our evidence out of hand in this cavalier manner
default as not being worthy of serious consideration
default. 
defaultFurthermore, Dr Kirkham’s pivotal role in the research and drafting of the External Review should be considered very carefully
default in t
defaulthe light of this statement. He wa
defaults sup
defaultposed to be an independent R
defaulteviewer, looking into serious claims of systemic maladministration, bad practice and pro-council bias at the LGO. The work and evidence of LGO Watch, published after both the 2005 and t
defaulthe 2012 inquiries, has been instrumental in bringing about a more critical attitude towards the LGO on the part 
defaultof the public and the Committee;
default and indeed, the evidence and material provided in the LGO Watch submission to the 2005 in
defaultquiry formed the basis
default of several of the questions asked 
defaultduring the evidence session. 
defaultThe evidence provided by LGO Watch – both via myself and the current Director – has not changed since 2005, albeit that new evidence has been added. This evidence was clearly rejected out-of-
defaulthand by Dr Kirkham before his started his External Review, as is 
defaultso apparent from
default the above quotation from his 2005 article. In fact, it is astonishing that 
defaultanyone who has publicly stated 
default“There has never been any 
defaultserious allegation that the LGO act in any
default other way but according to the highest standards of public conduct”
default should in any way be regarded as non-partisan enough to be charged with the tas
defaultk of conducting an independent External R
defaulteview of the LGO. It is clear from this quotation alone that he was
default very sympathetically inclined towards the LGO 
defaultlong 
defaultbefore he was appointed as an External Reviewer. 
defaultAt the beginning of his article, Dr Kirkham refers to the 2005 submissions to the ODMP Committee, and says, 
default“In amongst these submissions, there were eve
defaultn proposals for the abolition of the LGO [...] To a certain extent, such criticisms misunderstand the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms and the remit of the Ombudsmen.” 
defaultThis is the standard straw man a
defaultrgument. I was the only person
default calling for t
defaulthe abolition of the LGO as an alternative to radical reform
default in the 2005 
defaultODPM Committee 
defaultReport
default on the LGO
default. I was not, and am not, someone who misunderstands the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms or the remit of the Ombudsman. When I was Director o
defaultf LGO Watch, I told many people who contacted 
defaultme, and I told them 
defaulttime and time again
default,
default that the LGO could only investigate complaints that fell within his jurisdiction, and that even then, he could only investigate complaints where there was 
defaultprima facie
default ev
defaultidence of maladministration combined with evidence that not only
default had
default injustice been suffered, but 
defaultsignificant 
defaultinjustice. I was also fully aware that there was the restriction of time limits, of the local authority complaints procedure having to have been e
defaultxhausted, and of the necessity of no parallel legal action taking place 
defaultin order 
defaultfor a complaint to be considered
default by the LGO
default. There were some complainants who found these facts difficult to accept, or difficult to grasp, but I was 
defaultcertainly 
defaultnot one of them
default, and nei
defaultther was the current LGO Watch D
defaultirector. 
defaultNowhere in my submissions or campaigning have I ever expected the LGO to act outside his legal jurisdiction, or 
defaultrelax his criterion of
default requiring
default 
defaultprima facie
default evidence of maladministration with significant injustice. In fact, these are criteria and restrictions that I fully support, not least for pragmatic reasons. When I was Director of LGO Watch, I was infinitely more concerned about grave injustices that aff
defaultected very vulnerable people
default and their families
default, that could actually hav
defaulte brought about the loss of their lives or their mental health
default, than about any other issues that compl
defaultainants were taking to the LGO; 
defaultand these were the people I could not bear to sit 
defaultback and see the LGO betraying. 
defaultDr Kirkham was clearly referring 
defaultin the above quotation 
defaultto my own submission, as he 
defaultmakes reference to “EV 26” after making his point
default. Yet nowhere in my submission is there the slightest shred of evidence that I 
default“[misunders
defaulttood] the purpose of public sector redress mechanisms or the remit of the Ombudsman.”
default In fact, I gave very clear and detailed evidence that this
default was not the case. 
defaultDr Kirkham
default’s approach was to
default refer to my statement
default about LGO abolition, and then to create
default a 
defaultstraw man to attack, dismissing views that are very far from my own, and not giving me the courtesy of honouring and giving proper expression in his article to the real reason 
defaultwhy I was suggesting abolition. This is surely not the kind of attitude that ins
defaultpires confi
defaultdence in him as an independent and objective R
defaulteviewer of the LGO.
defaultOn page 384, Dr Kirkham’s article continues with an exploration of the LGO’s need to make the public aware of 
defaultthe LGO
default service. As he believes that the LGO behaves with such a high
default degree of probity, and dismisses the counterevidence as not being “serious”, he clearly does not appreciate the irony of how counterproductive it is to 
defaultencourage
default more people 
defaultto 
defaultuse a service that is systemically biased against them. 
defaultOn page 386, Dr Kirkh
defaultam explores the limitations of the LGO’s remit, including the point that the LGO is not allowed to look at the merits of a decision of a local authority taken 
default“in the exercise of a discretion vested in that authority.”
default This again has always been something 
defaultof which I 
defaultand 
defaultother senior members of LGO Watch have been very much aware, and 
defaultthat we have never
default wanted to contest. Yet instead of exploring
default what our arguments actually were
default, and what merits those arguments 
defaultmight 
defaulthave, Dr Kirkham again decides to produce
default another straw man to attack:
default“Judging from many of the consumer complaints made to the Select Committee on the Office of the Deputy Prime Minister, the failure of the LGO to review the merits of a local authority decision probably lies at the heart of muc
defaulth of the dissatisfaction that some members of the public experience with the LGO.”
defaultThe irrelevance continues on page 386, where Dr Kirkham writes about the disappointment of those whose complaints are not investigated by the LGO because they fall outside h
defaultis jurisdiction, or for other reasons to w
defaulthich I have referred above. What he presents as complainants’ objections
default bear no relevance to the arguments made by the current and previous Directors of LGO Watch in our 2005 and 2012 submissions: arguments that D
defaultr Kirkham ignores in favour of attacking arguments we did not and would not make. On page 387, Dr Kirkham writes about how important it is for the LGO to maintain an “
defaultaura of independence
default”, and goes on to consider the option of judicial review.
defaultOn page 388 Dr Kirkham states that 
default“[...] the public should be entitled to expect the highest standards of conduct and impartiality from the Ombudsman. Hence, it is a worry that in some quarters there is a perception that the LGO is too familiar with loca
defaultl authorities (Select Committee on the ODPM, 2004-2005, Ev 16-28). This perception has mostly been derived from the fact that two out of three present LGOs were Chief Executives of local authorities before moving to their present post (Local Government Omb
defaultudsman, 2005).” 
defaultBut Dr Kirkham’s assertion is 
defaultflawed, and posits a cause that is in fact an effect. It 
defaultwas LGO Watch that claimed the O
defaultmbudsmen were too close to local authorities, but we did not derive this perception from the fact that the Ombudsmen wer
defaulte ex-council CEOs. We derived the perception that the Ombudsmen were too close to local authorities from the fact that we had observed so much pro-council bias, not 
defaultonly in our own personal experienc
defaulte of complaining to them, but also in
default the evidence availa
defaultble in their annual reports, in the detail relating to their published Customer Satisfaction Surveys, and in the ongoing dishonesty and subterfuge we witnessed from their office as we conducted the 
defaultongoing 
defaultLGO Watch campaign. This was what caused the perce
defaultption that the Ombudsmen were biased in favour of local authorities. The fact that, in 2005, two of the Ombudsmen were ex-local a
defaultuthority CEOs merely provided a reasonable
default explanation as to why we were seeing such pro-council bias. 
defaultIf Dr Kirkham had bother
defaulted to speak to us, we would have been very happy to explain this to him. 
defaultOn page 389, Dr Kirkham writes about “silencing” critics of the LGO: 
default“Improving the openness and transparency of the work of the LGO through regular public scrutiny would probably g
defaulto a long way towards silencing critics of the post.” 
defaultIt is 
defaultperhaps revealing
default that Dr Kirkham has chosen to use the 
defaultphrase
default “silencing critics” here
default,
default instead of an alternative such as “reassuring cri
defaulttics”. For an articulate writer who chooses his words so 
defaultcarefully
default in the rest of his article, his clear wish to “silence” critics of the LGO rather than 
defaultto 
defaultsatisfy and reassure us
default, inadvertently 
defaultreveals
default his priority and his solidarity with the priorities
default of the then beleaguered LGO. Suggesting we should be “sil
defaultenced”
default certainly
default does nothing to reassure me
default as to his impartiality when, 
defaultfor the first time in its history, thanks to the Internet, the critics of the LGO had found a forum and a voice to challenge its institutional injustice. 
defaultA voice Dr Kirkham wanted to
default “silence”.
defaultOn page 390, he writes about delays during LGO investigations:
default“Such delays have even opened up the LGO to allegations of maladministration!” 
default“The ombudsman's 2011 Strategic Review, which it avoided publishing, suggested the bottom 20% of performers among the team handled some 10% cases. Some corporate functions within the ombudsman boasted staffing levels that were d
defaultifficult to justify and that a significant proportion of operational support existed only to provide basic administrative and office services.
defaultWe heard of cases sitting in the commissioner's office for 12 months. A body responsible for examining 
defaultmaladministration was now being accused of maladministration because of its lethargic and cumbersome approach. The ombudsman's response wasn't encouraging. It was sketchy about plans for transformation and appeared to learn little from good
default practice
default in Sco
defaulttland and Ireland.
defaultThere is no doubt the ombudsman needs to dramatically improve, and though it must retain its independence the Department for Communities and Local Government and parliament itself must push for that change.”
defaultOn page 391, Dr Kirkham write
defaults about the merits of local settlements, but omits to explore the effect on complainants of having a “local settlement” effectively imposed on them by the LGO should a local
default authority agree to it, but the complainant
default regard the remedy as inadequate: someth
defaulting that actually violates the definition of the word “settlement”, which normally implies agreement – perhaps with some compromise - by both or all parties concerned. Of course, in the case of complainants, the alternative to rejecting a “local settlement
default” proposed by the LGO is to have the investigation terminated and to get nothing at all. 
defaultFor somebody who purports to be representing “A Complainant’s View” in his article, Dr Kirkham certainly doesn’t give the genuine and legitimate concerns 
defaultof real compl
defaultainants 
defaultmuch of a look
default-in. Instead, the straw men complaints predominate,
default which are far easier to defend against.
defaultDr Kirkham makes another controversial statement on page 392:
default“[...] the LGO are there to perform a number of roles and, of those roles, publi
defaultcly calling local authorities to account is one of the least important.” 
defaultI am not convinced that the taxpayers who fund the LGO would have much sympathy for Dr Kirkham’s position on this matter. Surely one of the greatest checks and balances
default on the behavi
defaultour of a public authority, or of any person in public life, is the possibility of being publicly called to account. This is surely the essence of “accountability”. Admittedly, the priority of the LGO should be to provide a remedy for a complainant who has 
defaultsuffered maladministration with significant injustice and harm at the hands of his local authority. But to suggest that calling local authorities to account for maladministration should be “
defaultone of the least important roles”
default of the LGO is far too close for 
defaultcomfort to a justification of what so many complainants
default have perceived to be one of the greatest concerns of the LGO: to prevent the public becoming aware of the extent and seriousness of maladministration committed by his colleagues in local authorities.
defaultFor the reasons I have set out above, I stand by my assertion that Dr Kirkham
default, who makes his living by writing about 
defaultOmbudsme
defaultn, and who I do not believe the LGO w
defaultould have selected for
default the Review team if they had not been confident of his affinity,
default is a pr
defaultopagandist for the Local Government Ombudsman, and that
default the so-called External Review 
defaultis a whitewash. 
defaultThis is a long submission, and for reasons of time, I have concentrated on Dr Kirkham’s 2005 article rather than on the External Review Report itself. I 
defaultwould expect a conscientious Committee to regard the detail that I have provided above as
default 
defaultat the very least
default 
defaultprima facie
default evidence of bias on the part of this particular External Reviewer, and to initiate its own investigation as a result. An unpaid private 
defaultcitizen with a full-time job and family commitments should not be expected to do the job of the CLG Committee. On those occasions in the past when I have submitted evidence to the Committee and its predecessor of systemic LGO maladministration
default, it has rece
defaultived lip-service at best
default, and I am not at all confident
default that anything will change now in that respect.
defaultThe point must be made that inviting the LGO to commission its own “independent” External Review, especially as one 
defaultof 
defaultthe issues under investigation was
default to be the LGO’s fairne
defaultss, objectivity and probity, does
default not inspire confide
defaultnce that the Committee was 
defaultserious about a genuine independent External Review taking place. I can see no reason why the CLG Committee should not 
defaulthave appointed its own team of R
defaultev
defaultiewers. The same applies to the Customer Satisfaction Survey that the LGO is expected to commission
default for itself
default. On the basis of how previous surveys of this kind have been manipulated by the LGO, detailed in my 2005 and 2012 submissions, the fact that 
defaultthe 
defaultLGO could
default yet again
default have the opportunity to produce a more favourable 
defaultoutcome than it merits
default, is something that could easily have been avoided if the CLG Committee 
defaultitself 
defaulthad commissioned the survey and ensured the LGO had no opportunity to 
defaultinfluence it un
defaultfairly. 
default 
defaultExamples abound of LGO dishonesty with regard to surveys about them. There is even one very recent 
defaultexample
default that I discovered while reading through the LGO’
defaults recent R
defaultesponse to the
default Staff Satisfaction Survey, which I compared 
defaultto the
default actual R
defaulteport 
defaulton the results of that S
defaulturvey that had been circulated internally
default at the LGO
default, and leaked to LGO Watch by a mem
defaultber of LGO staff. In amongst the 
defaultdamage limitation attempt that was the 
defaultLGO’s response 
defaultto the damning Survey outcome,
default the 
defaultLGO stated:
default 
default“39% believ
defaulte we provide a great service to our customers but 34% are undecided.” 
defaultThere was no mention of any staff member disagreeing with the statement that they provided a “great service” to their customers.
defaultThis surely gives the impression that no-one had said th
defaultey positively disagreed with the statement. But the way this data has been presented 
defaultin the LGO’s response 
defaultdistracts from the fact that 27% of staff 
defaultpositively disagreed
default with the statement that the LGO
default provided a great service to their customers, of 
defaultwhom
default 7% 
defaultstrongly
default disagreed with the statement, resulting in a total of 61% of staff 
defaulteither disagreeing with the statement, or feeling unable to 
defaultagree with the statement
default with any degree of confidence
default. This can only have been deliberate
default misrepresentation of thei
defaultr staff’s opinions
default, and it is so typical of the spin-doctoring with which the LGO attempts to dupe
default both the public and
default those principled politicians who would not tolerate the behaviour of the LGO if they were fully aware of what is happening.
defaultAlthough time
default does not permit me to analyse the Ex
defaultternal Review in the same way that
default I have analysed Dr Kirkham’s article, I do hope that the Committee will compare the very positive report the External Reviewers have gifted to the LGO
default,
default with the damning indictment of t
defaulthe LGO provided by the LGO’s own staff in their Staff Satisfaction Survey that was sent to LGO Watch by a member of LGO staff, and that I have shared with the Committee. The two simply do not match up. 
defaultAn independent External Review should have been carri
defaulted out by people who are completely independent from the body being reviewed. The LGO were founder members of the British and Irish Ombudsman A
defaultssociation (BIOA). 
defaultDr Kirkham 
defaultcertainly 
defaultwas a member of the BIOA
default in the recent past
default, 
defaultand may well still be now, 
defaulta
defaultlong with the LGO. (
defaultPlease c
defaultlick on
default the
default link bel
defaultow and scroll to near bottom:
default “Member of British and Irish Ombudsman Association” 
defaulthttp://www.shef.ac.uk/law/staff/academic/rkirkham
default 
default.)
defaultAs far as I am concerned
default,
default a professional association 
defaulttends to function
default 
defaultas 
defaulta union that exists for the benefit and support of its members. Accordingly, I do not see how one member of an association can be considered to be truly independent from another
default member where the investigation of professional good practice is concerned.
defaultAs far as the other two members
default of the Re
defaultview 
defaultTeam 
defaultare concerned, 
defaultMr Jim 
defaultMartin
default, as the Scottish Public Services Ombudsman,
default was also criticised by Scottish Public Services Om
defaultbudsm
defaultan Watch in similar ways to which LGO Watch
default criticised the LGO. 
defaultHow could he therefore seriously be considered someone who would be likely to review the LGO impartially? As the SPSO, Mr
default Martin 
defaultwas also almost certainly a member of BIOS, and perhaps still i
defaults. 
defaultMr Richard 
defaultThomas was the Information Commissioner at one time, which is essentially just another name for an ombudsman. Legally
default,
default the LGO are also commissi
defaultoners, of course. I am sure that Mr Thomas is very 
defaultlikely to have been a member of
default BIOA when he 
defaultwas a commissioner
default, and may 
defaultwell 
defaultstill 
defaultbe
default a member
default. More importantly
default,
default he was in 2009 elected as Chairman of the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council. 
defaultThis Council is loaded with members who are 
defaultOmbudsmen and 'friendly' 
defaultacademics
default, albeit not 
defaultDr 
defaultKirkham:
defaulthttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_Justice_and_Tribunals_Council
defaultIn 2010 the G
defaultovernment wanted to abolish the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council
defaulthttp://www.public
defaultations.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmjust/965/96504.htm
defaultbut it has only recently folded:
defaulthttp://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Administrative_Justice_and_Tribunals_Council
defaultI
defaultf the Administrative Justice and Tribunals Council 
defaulthad been
default doing their job
default properly, a component
default of which was to keep under review administrative justice
default, then the LGO, the SPS
defaultO and 
defaultthe Public Services Ombudsman for Wales would have been improved a long time ago. Furthermore, if they were doing a good job, why did the Government abolish them? 
defaultSo why would the CLG Committee expect the ex-C
defaulthair
defaultperson
default of the Administrative Justice
default and Tribunals Council to do something 
defaultnow that 
defaulthe 
defaulthad 
defaultfailed to do wh
defaulten he was the C
defaulthair
defaultperson: that is, to e
defaultffectively review the performance 
defaultof the LGO?
defaultHowever one decides to
default describe the 
defaultprofessional 
defaultrelati
defaultonship between the LGO and the R
defaulteviewers
default, it
default appears to be a 
defaultvery incestuous 
defaultone. The
default BIOA, 
defaultthe AJ&amp;TC, Ombudsmen, LGO-friendly academics: all the usual parties
default keep cropping up
default. A far cry from what looks like independent 
defaultexternal 
defaultevaluation from where I’m sitting. 
defaultThe Committee asked me to provide 
defaultfurther, 
defaultdetailed evidence of bias and whitewashing in the External Review. I have prov
defaultided a great deal of
default evidence above, but any amount of evidence can be rejected as an indication of bias, if the person evaluating the evidence is
default,
default 
defaultfor any reason, simpl
defaulty 
defaultunwilling to see 
defaultthe bias
default. Although a
default 
defaultlegitimate 
defaultjudgment 
defaultof bias will be
default based on 
defaultreasonable 
defaultevidence, it is ultimately a subjective interpretation: and those people who have vested interests in not seeing bias will always be able to say that, in their 
defaultopinion, no bias is in evidence, and
default they may be skilled in selecting
default the counter-evidence t
defaulthey adduce to justify their position.
defaultWhere the behaviour of the LGO is concerned, and the behaviour of those who defend and protect it, there are values at play th
defaultat are profoundly opposed to the kind of values that reflect the best of British society. The culture of selfishness, of dishonesty, and of protection of vested interests at the expense of the poor and vulnerable, is one that is alien to 
defaultwhat is best in Br
defaultitish culture;
default and no matter how much those entrusted with the power to change this situation let us down, there will always be good, decent citizens in this country willing to expose and chal
defaultlenge institutional wrongdoing, as well as a media that from tim
defaulte to time 
defaultsucceeds in ensuring that
default such 
defaultwrongdoing is exposed
default,
default and that those responsible for and complicit in it
default,
default are eventually held to account. 
defaultGary Powell
defaultNovember 2013
default1
default&#xa0;
default