&#xa0;
defaultLetter to the Chair of the Committee from Dr Jane Martin, Local Government OmbudsmandefaultCLG Committee Inquiry on the work of the Local Government OmbudsmandefaultIn previous submissions to the Committee we have shared information on how the organisation has developed over the last 12 months and I look forward to exploring those issues in December. 
defaultG
defaultiven the importance of leadership to the future success of LGO, I a
defaultm taking this opportunity to give my own reflections as Chair of the Commission for Local Administration and, since Anne Seex’s absence from November of last year, the sole Local Government Ombudsman. 
defaultOperational performancedefaultThe new caseworking arrangemen
defaultts introduced in Apri
defaultl this year as a result of the transformation p
defaultlan have been successful in helping us to deliver a swifter service to the public. Our previous submission contained detailed information about our performance which showed that since the 
defaultintroduction of the new approach we have exceeded our time targets each month. Our performance also meets or exceeds the speed of decision making of other public 
defaultsector ombudsmen. However, the
default arrangements are still new 
defaultand
default we will 
defaultclosely monitor
default them to 
defaultensure we sustain those levels of performance.
defaultThe public not only want to receive a decision within a short timescale but also want to know that the decisions we make are accurate and fair. Our Annual Report for 2012-13 showed that both complaints about o
defaultur service and requests for reviews of our decisions have decreased by 38% and 19% respectively. 
defaultIn particular, I am pleased that we have a much better picture to report on cases which have taken over 52 weeks to conclude
default.
default 
defaultA number of these are 
defaultjoint inve
defaultstigations with the Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman (PHSO). We recognise that we need to do better and have been working with PHSO to more closely harmonise our approach so that investigations can proceed more smoothly and swiftly. We will short
defaultly be publishing a new protocol
default 
defaultthat 
defaultclarifies our
default approach.
defaultMost of the joint investigations are complaints about health and social care and we will continue to work with PHSO to make the current statutory arrangements work as well as possible. However, a
defaults health services become more closely integrated with 
defaultsocial care at the local government level
default, Parliament may need to consider whether a new legislative approach is needed to deliver a more joined up ombudsman landscape across English public services, as is currently the case in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland. 
defaultPublic confidence in the OmbuddefaultsmandefaultPublic confidence in LGO is primarily driven by the quality of the service we provide. The External Evaluation of LGO concluded that our decision making procedures meet the Ombudsman Association’s principles for fairness, openness and transparency and
default that our new performance management and quality framework is appropriately robust and effective. The report of the External Evaluation, along with the data we have previously submitted on our performance, show that the public can have confidence in LGO. W
defaulte have to continue to 
defaultearn that confidence by sustaining consistently high standards. Our newly introduced quality
default standards
default framework is designed to provide that assurance.
defaultIt was clear from submissions to the Committee’s previous inquiry that public conf
defaultidence is also affected by perceptions of the independence and impartiality of our investigations. The publication of all of our decisions, the first public sector ombudsman 
defaultto 
defaultdo so, will help the public to better understand the reasons for our decisions 
defaultand the evidence on which they are based. In response to recommendations made by the External Evaluation
default,
default our policy and guidance on avoiding conflicts of interest are published on our website and we also now publish details of the number of staff who have
default previously worked for a local authority. 
defaultWe now need to measure how successful we have been in increasing confidence and identify areas where we have further work to do. Our business plan identifies two clear actions that will help us to measure this; cu
defaultstomer satisfaction research and the establishment of an advisory forum. As set out in our previous submission, both of these are progressing well and by the end of the business year we will have clear data to establish how confident service users are in o
defaultur work. We will share those results with the Committee and on our website once they are available.
defaultRelationship with staffdefaultThe 2012 staff survey highlighted a number of issues for the leadership and management of the LGO to address.  In support of the cha
defaultnges we have made I have clarified my role as Ombudsman to ensure clear leadership on casework and promote an open and accountable culture. I am accountable for my performance against objectives through a 360 degree appraisal process led by the independent
default chair of our remuneration committee 
defaultGreater staff involvement has also been encouraged and earlier this year we established a Casework Policy Forum which I chair
default,
default to provide a vehicle through which decisions about our policy on casework related issues ar
defaulte determined.
default 
defaultMy role in approving every report that we publish also ensures that I have a clear view of the significant issues arising in our casework
default and give clear direction to investigators
default.  
defaultImproving feedback channels and communication with our staf
defaultf has also been central to a more open and accountable culture. Staff have told us that they most value face to face communication from their direct line managers. Earlier this year we introduced a new method of feeding back from our Leadership Group meeti
defaultngs that better meets those communications preferences of staff. A ‘Talking Points’ briefing note is produced immediately following the Leadership Group which is then discussed in all team meetings the following week. This approach ensures that everyone re
defaultceives contemporaneous information face to face with an opportunity to discuss and feedback to their manager.
defaultWe have 
defaultsuccessfully 
defaultmanaged the most significant organisational change in LGO’s forty year history.  
defaultUndoubtedly, this has been a very unsettling
default time for many people
default in the organisation
default. 
defaultWe recognise that it is our capable and committed workforce that will 
defaultenable
default LGO to continue to deliver an effective service and we will continue to support them as the organisation develops. 
defaultThe futuredefaultThrough stronger 
defaultleadership and a dedicated work
defaultforce we have transformed the LGO into a more effective, cost efficient and responsive ombudsman scheme. The changes we have made place us in a strong position to meet the challenges of a rapidly changing pub
defaultlic services landscape.
defaultWe must now ensure that the organisation is resilient in order to meet future challenges. We have had some difficulty recruiting to posts required in the transformation plan and must ensure we have sufficient investigative capacity 
defaultto meet future 
defaultbusiness 
defaultneeds. This will be a key consideration 
defaultin
default 
defaultthe rationalisation of 
defaultfuture office accommodation. We also need to be able to maximise public awareness of our service especially in relation to social care.
defaultOur business plan for 2014-15 
defaultwill focus on
defaultThe next business year is also likely to see a wider debate about the role that LGO and other public sector ombudsmen should play in the future. The inquiry into complaints by the Public Administration Select Committe
defaulte (PASC), along with the review of the ombudsman landscape by Cabinet Office Minister Oliver Letwin MP, provides an opportunity to ensure that the experiences of local government complaints and the changing face of local service delivery informs the future
default direction of any reforms.
defaultThe complaints system 
defaultfor
default 
defaultpublic services 
defaultincluding route to independent redress from the ombudsma
defaultn
default,
default need
defaults
default to reflect increasingly locally delivered and accountable
default public services
default. 
defaultT
defaulthe existing complaints system may no longe
defaultr me
defaultet the needs of the citizen
default as a consumer of public services. 
defaultAt LGO, our main purpose and focus will continue to be ensuring that our operating model delivers a quality service; that we maintain a sustainable workforce and that we remain an authoritative
default voice that engenders public trust and confidence.
default&#xa0;
default1 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default