&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultLetter to the Chair of the Committee from Andrew Rose, defaultChief Executive, defaultHomes and Communities AgencydefaultRef:  defaultThe Performance of the Department for Communities and Local Governmentdefault&#xa0;
defaultT
defaulthank you for your letter
default of 17
defaultth
default October 2013 seeking further information on some of the points that emerged in the Select Committee session on 14
defaultth
default October.  
default&#xa0;
defaultYou 
defaulthave requested a note explaining
default why HCA was guaranteeing payments under loan obligations f
defaultor Home Group.
default 
defaultBy way of background
default,
default on 
default 6 May 1987
default a predecessor body of the Agency
default,
default together with 19 other public sector bodies jointly and severally guaranteed the payment of interest and capital in respect of up to £100m of 8.75% guaranteed loan stock 
defaultof Home Group. The Agency’s currently assessed share of this contingent liability is 21.65%, and the repayment of capital is due in 2037. The guarantee was issued with the 
defaultthen 
defaultSecretary of State’s consent.
default&#xa0;
defaultD
defaultetails can be found in HCA’s own Annual Report 
defaultand Financial Statement
defaults 2012/13
default 
defaultunder Note 43 
defaulton 
defaultpage 
default106
default, a cop
defaulty
default of which is 
defaultenclosed
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultHome Group is a Registered Pro
defaultvider and as such 
defaultis 
defaultsubject to regulation by the HCA
default.
default 
defaultI hope you will appreciate that as the 
defaultguarantee was 
defaultissue
defaultd over 
default26
default year
defaults
default ago, it is difficult for me to ascertain the rationale for extending the guarantee at the time.
default&#xa0;
defaultYou also identify in your lett
defaulter the case raised by 
defaultJohn Pugh about a landlord in Kirklees using money that was intended for affordable homes to build homes for market rent. 
defaultI
defaultn this particular case, the landlord was provided with funding by Kirklees Council as part of their overall all
defaultocation of £2.8m under the Clusters of Empty Homes programme, which is administered by local authorities. HCA played an advisory role in allocating funding at a high level to the local authorities involved.  Those local authorities then make decisions abou
defaultt investing the available monies at a local level.  The HCA does not deliver or manage this programme. The funding is un-ringfenced grant, under section 31 of the Local Government Act 2003, given directly from DCLG to 
defaultl
defaultocal 
defaulta
defaultuthorities participating in the
default programme. The monitoring arrangements will be set up betw
defaulteen DCLG and the local authorities
default 
defaultit
default funds to monitor how this money is spent. It is worth noting that the terms of the programme do not prevent market rent being charged as part of a blend of mar
defaultket and affordable rent properties. It is a matter for Kirklees Council to confirm under what conditions the funding was allocated in this particular case. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhile the HCA did not allocate the funding in this case, you asked about the arrangements HCA has 
defaultin place for ensuring that the public money we discharge is being spent in the way it was intended. Across all of our affordable housing grant funded programmes, we commission an annual programme of compliance audit checks
default. 
default 
defaultThrough these, we require
default exter
defaultnal auditors
default to
default carry out compliance checks
default on a
default sample of eligible schemes and providers against the information submitted to us 
defaultand 
defaultwhich form
default the ba
defaultsis for our investment decision
default.   It is rare that the compliance audit process finds non-compliance wher
defaulte monies have knowingly been improperly claimed.  Where errors are found (which may be clerical or procedural), our options include requiring that the r
defaultecipient corrects the error, or
default 
defaultwhere correction is not possible or the breach is considered to be del
defaultib
defaulterate
default,
default reclaiming all, or a proportion of the grant
default.  In extreme cases, if our findings indicate that there may be a more widespread issue within the registered provider, we can refer the case to the regulator for their consideration.
default   
default&#xa0;
defaultThe high level of
default compliance in correctly claiming funding in line with originally agreed proposals demonstrates that our partners are meeting our requirements, and act in cognisance that we have monitoring systems in place to identify discrepancies.  The National Audit Of
defaultfice, as part of its annual audit of the HCA’s processes
default,
default reviews our compliance audit processes 
defaultin order to assure
default itself that these are operating effectively. 
default&#xa0;
defaultYour last point referred to Pat Ritchie’s intention to reintroduce a staff survey in 2012 and I can confirm that HCA carried this out in July 2012. The survey is 
defaultnow 
defaultrun on an annual basis. We ran 
defaulta subsequent
default staff survey in 
defaultMay
default of this year and I enclose
default a summary of the latest results for your information. You will see from the results that we compare well with wider government
default though we are striving for annual improvements
default. We publish our results internally for staff alongside agreed action plans to add
defaultress areas where we are focussing on improving scores. 
defaultWe r
defaultu
defaultn a number of programmes focused on improving the HCA as an employer of choice
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease feel free to contact me again should you require further information on this response.
default&#xa0;
default31 October 2013
default&#xa0;
default