&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Monitor (AMO00default10default)defaultAs an 
defaultorganisation
default directly accountable to Parliament, Monitor welcomes the opportunity to provide the Health Select Committee with an annual accountability report.  This information is provided to aid the Committee in discharging its duty.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default1.1 The Health and Social Care Act 2012 made significant changes to our role by broadening our remit to become the sector regulator for health services in England. Our primary duty as sector regulator is to protect and promote the interests of patients by making sure that the whole sector works for their benefit. To achieve that over the coming years will mean, above all, helping the sector to close the gap between quality expectations and current performance, and the gap between revenues and costs.
default&#xa0;
default1.2 We fulfil our primary duty by focusing on six core objectives. The first four of these are closely related to our four main organisational functions: assessment, provider regulation, pricing, and co-operation and competition. There are then two cross-cutting objectives which support our overall success in making sure the health sector works for patients.
default&#xa0;
default1.3 Our first core objective is to make sure public providers are well led.  We do this in two ways. First, we set a required standard that all NHS trusts must meet (our foundation trust authorisation standard) and we work with the NHS Trust Development Authority (NHS TDA) and the Care Quality Commission (CQC) to ensure that they meet it. This work is led by our Assessment Directorate. Second, we monitor the performance of foundation trusts to identify serious risks of them falling back below the required standard once authorised, and we take action if they show signs of doing so. This work is led by our Provider Regulation Directorate. 
defaultLooking first at assessment, during 2012/13 and the first six months of 2013/14 we have authorised four NHS trusts as foundation trusts and have deferred or postponed a number of others that were referred to us by the NHS TDA. In addition to this assessment activity, over recent months we have been working with the CQC and the NHS TDA to review and streamline the foundation trust assessment process to respond to the recommendations of the Francis Inquiry, the CQC’s new inspection regime and the NHS TDA’s approach to preparing trusts for authorisation and to eliminate any duplication or inconsistency amongst us. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn provider regulation, we have moved to a new regime based on the provider licence, which we introduced for foundation trusts on 1 April 2013. We took a number of steps to ensure a smooth transition, which included making sure that the 19 foundations trusts previously in significant breach of their terms of authorisation under our old regime remained subject to robust regulatory action under the new licence. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe proportion of foundation trusts subject to regulatory action has grown. As at 31 October 2013 there were 147 foundation trusts in total and 22 of them were subject to formal regulatory action. Colchester NHS Foundation Trust was put into the special measures regime on the 14
defaultth
default of November 2013. We are carrying out investigations at a further ten. During 2012/13 and the first part of 2013/14 we have used our enforcement powers to make changes to the leadership at four foundation trusts 
default&#xa0;
defaultOver recent months we have continued to develop our regulatory approach in response to the Francis Report and the Keogh and Berwick reviews. For example, following the Keogh Review into trusts with high mortality rates, we placed six of the nine foundation trusts into special measures, which included suspending some of the autonomy that foundation trusts normally enjoy. We are also working closely with the CQC as it develops its new inspection regime to ensure that our regulatory regimes are closely aligned.
default&#xa0;
default1.4 Our second core objective is to make sure essential services are maintained. If a provider of essential NHS services gets into serious difficulty and is likely to be unable to continue providing them, we support commissioners to ensure that those services continue to be provided for patients. Our focus here is on services rather than organisations. This work is also led by our Provider Regulation Directorate, where we have set up a dedicated Enforcement Team to deal with the more complex regulatory action needed in this area. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSince taking on this new continuity of services role as set out in the 2012 Act, we have adapted our approach to the circumstances of each particular case. For Mid Staffordshire NHS foundation Trust we appointed a Contingency Planning Team (CPT) which found that the trust was neither clinically nor financially sustainable.  We therefore appointed Trust Special Administrators (TSAs) to recommend how the services that local commissioners had identified as needing to be delivered locally could continue to be provided on a sustainable basis.
default&#xa0;
defaultFor Peterborough and Stamford Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, we appointed a CPT which found the trust to be clinically and operationally sustainable but financially unsustainable. In this case we accepted undertakings from the trust to implement the CPT’s recommendations in order to reduce the trust’s deficit. In the Milton Keynes and Bedfordshire area we have agreed with NHS England and the NHS TDA that we will work together to support local clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) to consider the issues facing local trusts in the context of the wider health economy. 
default&#xa0;
default1.5 Our third core objective is to make sure the NHS payment system promotes quality and efficiency. We are jointly responsible for the NHS payment system with NHS England and our work in this area is led by our Pricing Directorate. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHaving carried out research last year which identified significant opportunities to improve the payment system, particularly in the area of improving the accuracy of the cost data used for price setting, we are now using this to inform our price setting strategy. We have engaged 
defaultwith the sector both on our initial thinking about a long term payment strategy which could do more for patients by incentivising quality and efficiency, and on our specific proposals for the 2014/15 national tariff. This engagement helped to shape the proposals for 2014/15 on which we recently consulted.
default&#xa0;
default1.6 Our fourth core objective is to make sure choice and competition operate in the best interests of patients. Under the 2012 Act we took on new powers in this area, which are designed to support the process through which patients or commissioners choose which provider of care best meets their needs. This work is led by our Co-operation and Competition Directorate which was formed when the staff of the NHS Co-operation and Competition Panel joined Monitor on 1 April 2013.
default&#xa0;
defaultChoice and competition have existed within the NHS for many years and are now governed by specific rules laid down by Parliament. It has become clear over recent months that there is a significant level of misunderstanding and concern about how the rules affect the sector and we are working to help commissioners and providers understand how the rules can help them deliver better patient care and better value for money. We are doing this by providing guidance, engaging with providers and providing an increasing amount of informal advice on how the rules apply in specific local situations.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur aim is to help commissioners and providers to act in the interests of patients.  Sometimes we do need to investigate potential breaches of the rules and take enforcement action to ensure that any patient harm is addressed. We aim to focus these investigations where they will have the greatest benefit for patients. This year we have started investigations into three complaints relating to whether the commissioning and provision of NHS services are being carried out in patients’ best interests. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also carry out studies to see whether particular aspects of the sector are working effectively for patients. This year we have worked on studies on the provision of walk-in centres and of GP services, both of which began with a call for evidence.
default&#xa0;
defaultMergers involving foundation trusts are reviewed by the Office of Fair Trading (OFT) and we provide advice to them on the patient benefits arising from a proposed merger. We have recently agreed to work together to reduce the number of mergers requiring notification to the OFT and to minimise the risk of lengthy review. Under these new arrangements Monitor will actively scrutinise the strategies of foundation trusts, including any merger proposals, at an earlier stage to provide appropriate challenge and advice. 
default&#xa0;
default1.7 Our fifth core objective is to promote change through high quality analysis and debate. There is broad agreement that the health sector needs to deliver care in different ways in future if it is to meet the significant challenge of improving the quality of care while also closing the funding gap. In addition to using our regulatory levers and incentives to help the sector with this challenge, we believe we can also help by using high quality analysis to 
defaultstimulate and inform debate on some of the critical issues that need to be addressed. This work is largely led by our Policy and Economics teams. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAn example of this work is the report we recently published, 
defaultClosing the NHS funding gap: how to get better value health care for patients
default, based on analysis of the available data, to contribute to the debate about how best to tackle the challenge. As a next step, as part of the Call to Action, we will bring expert views together later in November to consider innovative ways of delivering the services patients need in future. We are also examining the challenges faced by providers in delivering high-quality sustainable care, initially focusing on smaller non-specialised acute trusts.
default&#xa0;
default1.8 Our sixth core objective is to make sure Monitor is a high performing organisation. This is critical for us to be able to fulfil our primary duty effectively. There are two key elements to this: recruiting the best people and then motivating and developing them to achieve the best they can for patients. During the last year we have recruited 167 staff to enable us to build and carry out our new functions effectively and we continue to focus on this. We are determined to recruit, develop and retain outstanding people. In particular, we need more people with front line clinical and health sector management experience.  We are currently waiting Departmental
default approval for the appointment of a Director of Patient and Clinical Engagement. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition we are putting in place a new programme of professional and leadership development. In particular we need to achieve a significant improvement in our approach to personal development, both to enhance our attractiveness to potential recruits and to maximise the potential of our staff.
default&#xa0;
default1.9 In order to prioritise and focus our efforts across these six objectives we are currently developing our overall strategy and expect to start engaging with key stakeholders to get their views on it within the next few weeks.
default&#xa0;
default1.10 What matters to us is that all our work helps to improve the quality of services so that they are clinically effective, safe and provide a positive experience for everyone who uses them. Where we have complex decisions or trade-offs to make we will be guided by one simple principle: we will do whatever is ultimately in the best interests of patients.
default&#xa0;
default2.1 Our assessment function assesses applicant NHS trusts for NHS foundation trust status. This section outlines the work we carried out during 2012/13 and so far in this financial year, together with changes to processes that have either been adopted or are proposed. 
default2.2 Our assessment process is designed to make sure that applicant trusts are able to continue delivering good quality services for patients through being well led and are run efficiently. We work closely with the CQC to make sure that we have understood and taken fully into account their views on the quality of care at an applicant trust. 
defaultChanges to guidance
default2.3 During 2012/13 we revised our 
defaultGuide for Applicants
default to reflect the two recommendations set out by an internal review into Monitor’s assessment of University Hospitals of Morecambe Bay NHS Foundation Trust:
default2.4 We have also updated our guidance and processes in response to the introduction of Monitor’s new licence (which came into effect on 1 April 2013) and to maintain consistency with the 
defaultRisk Assessment Framework 
defaultwhich replaced our Compliance Framework
default from 1 October 2013. 
defaultResponse to Francis Inquiry and streamlining regulatory processes
default2.5 In Q1 2013/14, Monitor’s assessment team, and representatives from the NHS Trust Development Authority (NHS TDA) and CQC set up a joint working group to review the NHS foundation trust assessment process. This was in response to three main factors:
defaultThis review should ensure that the process for assessing an application from trusts:
defaultKey changes agreed after the first phase of work are:
defaultThe main steps from the second phase of work to be carried out during the final three months of 2013 are: 
defaultImpact of changes to CQC inspection regime
default2.6 The introduction by CQC of a new inspection regime has had implications for the current authorisation process. Monitor’s Board needs to be assured of the quality of care at applicant trusts before they are authorised as foundation trusts. In light of the CQC’s work to design and pilot a new inspection regime during 2013/14, our Board decided not to finalise any assessment decisions on applicant trusts until updated assurance could be received from the CQC under their new inspection regime. 
default2.7 In order to minimise the effect on trusts in the pipeline, we worked with NHS TDA and CQC to make sure that:
default2.8 As a transitional measure, pending finalisation by the CQC of their approach, we decided to split the assessment process into two phases for recent applicants. The first will focus on areas that will benefit applicants most through early identification of issues, whilst minimising the risk of duplication in the second phase. The second phase will commence when a CQC inspection has been satisfactorily completed. 
default2.9 For deferred and postponed applicant trusts, we do not expect to start reassessing them until the outcome of their CQC inspection is known. Deferral periods have been extended to allow for this. 
defaultSupporting innovation through assessment
default2.10 We are committed to innovation in the NHS and we want to support new ways of working. This may include organising the provision of care in innovative ways and accommodating types of trusts that we have not previously regulated. For example integrated care organisations could in time apply for NHS foundation trust status. In order to prepare ourselves, we have reviewed our assessment process to accommodate new organisations like this. We are also looking at our assessment process and regulatory approach to understand requirements to accommodate organisations providing high secure mental health services.
defaultAssessment activity during 2012/13 and 2013/14 to date
default2.11 We continue to assess applicant trusts for foundation trust status against the criteria laid out in Monitor’s 
defaultGuide for Applicants
default.  
default2.12 During 2012/13, 12 trusts were referred to us compared with five in 2011/12.  In the first six months of 2013/14, five trusts were referred to us.
default2.13 In 2012/13, we authorised two trusts, deferred five trusts (where Monitor’s Board determined that the trusts did not meet our authorisation criteria) and agreed postponements of four trusts. To date, in 2013/14, we have authorised two trusts, and deferred or postponed a further five. Four trusts chose to withdraw in order to focus on resolving issues. Five trusts are currently being assessed under our interim two-phase assessment process. 
defaultFigure 1. Assessment outcomesdefaultYTD: year to date 
default2.14 There has been a higher than usual number of withdrawals in 2013/14. Withdrawals normally occur where trusts, whose applications have previously been deferred or postponed, are unable to address the problems that have been a bar to authorisation within a reasonable timeframe. Three trusts withdrew owing to quality concerns and one due to issues in their local health economy. We provide feedback to all unsuccessful applicant trusts so that they can learn and improve. We now include the NHS TDA in these debrief sessions.
default2.15 For first-time applicants the average time taken to complete the assessment work has been five months. This is shorter than the six to seven months in the previous year which was the first full year in which quality governance was part of our assessment, leading to some trusts needing additional time. 
default2.16 Under the phased approach to assessment described above, we would expect that following the first phase of review, trusts would have an opportunity to address any issues identified in advance of the second phase. 
defaultLooking ahead and the NHS foundation trust pipeline
default2.17 Since taking on responsibility for referring trusts to Monitor for assessment, the NHS TDA has re-assessed the pipeline of trusts and likely timings of assessment.
default2.18 The NHS TDA estimated in July 2013 that 14 of the trusts in its portfolio could not be put forward for NHS foundation trust status in their current organisational form. Since that time, South London Healthcare NHS Trust has been dissolved. Excluding these 14 trusts, 69 remain within the NHS TDA pipeline.
default2.19 The need for a CQC inspection with a rating of at least “good” before the NHS TDA refers an applicant to Monitor will affect the timing of future referrals.
default3. Ensuring public providers are well led - provider regulationdefault3.1 Our role is to provide a regulatory framework ensuring that NHS foundation trusts are well led and can provide quality services on a sustainable basis. This means they can continue to deliver good patient care and value for money and, more generally, it protects the provision of essential local services for patients. 
default3.2 We operate a proportionate and risk-based regulatory regime which sets the conditions under which NHS foundation trusts are required to operate and ensures that these are met. It is important that we correctly balance risk and regulatory burden. We hold boards to account for the governance arrangements in place (which is a vital driver of organisational success) and to ensure their organisations are delivering safe care and are financially stable. Where improvements are needed, we work closely with a board on plans to deliver these. Where it fails to do this we will quickly take action, using our formal powers to intervene if necessary.
defaultIntroducing the provider licence
default3.3 Monitor now issues a provider licence which was granted to NHS foundation trusts on 1 April 2013. This replaced trusts’ Terms of Authorisation as our main regulatory tool. While the licence sets out requirements for trusts covering pricing, competition and integration, the important and associated challenge for Monitor during the year was to adapt our framework to assess trusts’ governance and financial risk against this new licence regime. Other providers of NHS funded health care services must hold a provider licence from 1 April 2014 unless they meet exemption criteria set out by DH.
defaultTransition of our regulatory regime for NHS foundation trusts
default3.4 We took several steps to ensure a smooth transition from regulating under the Terms of Authorisation to the provider licence:
defaultOverseeing governance and finance under the licence
default3.5 To support the new regime, after a consultation exercise we developed the 
defaultRisk Assessment Framework
default.
default3.6 The framework takes key requirements in the licence conditions for continuity of services and NHS foundation trust governance, and converts them into a risk-based oversight regime assessing both how well foundation trusts are governed and any potential risk to their financial sustainability.
default3.7 The risk ratings set out in the framework indicate whether a trust may be in breach of its licence. Where this looks likely, we consider whether informal interaction with the trust or a formal investigation with potential use of our enforcement powers is appropriate.
default3.8 The 
defaultCompliance Framework
default, as operated under the previous regime, was used in a revised form for the first six months of 2013/14 in advance of the new framework coming in to force on 1 October 2013. 
defaultDevelopments in the Provider Regulation Directorate 
default3.9 With the introduction of the new provider licence, our compliance function, now known as the Provider Regulation Directorate, has been restructured:
defaultRegulatory action
default3.10 In 2012/13, we found seven trusts in significant breach of their terms of Authorisation. This compares with ten in 2011/12 and three in 2010/11. Since 1 April 2013, three trusts have been subject to formal enforcement action under the new licence regime. Additionally, formal enforcement action has been increased at 10 trusts.
default3.11 Five trusts were removed from significant breach during 2012/13: Blackpool Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Gloucestershire Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, James Paget University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Wirral University Teaching Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust. A number of other foundation trusts could have their enforcement action lifted in the next six to nine months.
default3.12 On 31 October 2013, there were a total of 22 trusts subject to formal regulatory action (see Figure 4); investigations were underway at a further ten trusts to determine whether they were in breach of their licence and whether formal action is required.  
defaultFigure 2.NHS foundation trusts subject to formal regulatory action at 31 October 2013defaultTrustdefaultReason for regulatory actiondefault(Finance/Governance)defaultTime under regulatory action (months)defaultCommentdefaultMid-Staffordshire NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default55
defaultTrust special administrator
defaultHeatherwooddefault and defaultWexhamdefault Park NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default51
default&#xa0;
defaultBasildon and Thurrock University Hospitals NHS Foundation TrustdefaultGovernance
default47
defaultSpecial measures
defaultMilton Keynes Hospital NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default43
defaultLocal Health Economy review
defaultTameside Hospital NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default32
defaultSpecial measures
defaultMedway NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default30
defaultSpecial measures
defaultUniversity Hospitals of Morecambe Bay NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default24
default&#xa0;
defaultPeterborough and Stamford Hospitals NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default24
defaultContingency Planning Team
defaultBurton Hospitals NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default23
defaultSpecial measures
defaultSouthenddefault University Hospital NHS Foundation TrustdefaultGovernance
default22
default&#xa0;
defaultDerby Hospitals NHS Foundation defaultTrustdefaultFinance and 
defaultGovernance
default21
default&#xa0;
defaultQueen Elizabeth Hospital King’s Lynn NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default21
defaultSpecial measures
defaultBolton NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default18
default&#xa0;
defaultRoyal National Hospital for Rheumatic Diseases NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance
default17
default&#xa0;
defaultSherwood Forest Hospitals NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default13
defaultSpecial measures
defaultCambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default11
default&#xa0;
defaultKettering General Hospital NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default12
default&#xa0;
defaultStockport NHS Foundation TrustdefaultGovernance
default9
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Rotherham NHS Foundation TrustdefaultFinance and Governance
default8
default&#xa0;
defaultDorset Healthcare University NHS Foundation TrustdefaultGovernance 
default6
default&#xa0;
defaultNorth Lincolnshire and Goole NHS Foundation TrustdefaultGovernance
default3
defaultSpecial measures
defaultAintree University Hospital NHS Foundation TrustdefaultGovernance
default1
default&#xa0;
default*the above table does not include Colchester NHS Foundation Trust which was put into special measured on 14 November 2013.
default              
default3.13 Fifteen of the 22 trusts subject to regulatory action have both financial and governance problems. This reflects that, in many cases, trusts are faced with complex and interdependent issues; there are also increasing financial pressures on trusts that are required to invest to address operational and quality challenges. 
default3.14 We take statutory enforcement action in response to serious issues where trusts are particularly challenged or have not shown enough progress in returning to compliance. In 2012/13, we used our formal powers of intervention under section 52 of the NHS Act 2006 at three trusts:
default3.15 Since 1 April 2013, we have used our formal powers under the 2012 Act to address serious concerns over the leadership of two trusts:
defaultSpecial measures
default3.16 Following the reviews by Sir Bruce Keogh into 14 trusts (both NHS foundation trusts and NHS trusts) with high mortality rates, six of the nine foundation trusts reviewed were placed in special measures. 
default3.17 Where trusts are found to have provided inadequate care and are not well led we designate them as being in special measures.  We put in place a package of measures to secure significant improvements within 12 months. Although the range of actions will vary, all trusts subject to special measures must have:
default3.18 In October 2013, Queen Elizabeth Hospital King’s Lynn NHS Foundation Trust was placed in special measures and will be subject to the same package of requirements as the six foundation trusts highlighted by Sir Bruce Keogh. To enable the trust to make the necessary improvements to quality of care, we appointed David Dean as interim chair, 
defaultManjit
default 
defaultObhrai
default as interim chief executive and David Hill as improvement director. The trust is also required to appoint interim executive-level nursing support. 
default3.19 In November 2013, Colchester NHS Foundation Trust was also placed into special measures.  A similar package of support will be put into the trust and a review of Board governance is also required.  We will take steps to change the leadership if that proves necessary.
default3.20 On 31 October 2013, there were 147 foundation trusts, compared with 144 at 1 April 2012. The proportion of trusts subject to regulatory action has grown:  
defaultDatedefaultTotal NHS FTsdefaultNumber of NHS FTs subject defaultto regulatory actiondefault% of all NHS FTs subject defaultto regulatory actiondefault% of acute NHS FTs subject defaultto regulatory actiondefault1April 2011default136
default10
default7%
default13%
default1 April 2012default144
default17
default12%
default17%
default31 October 2013default147
default22
default15%
default24%
default*the above table does not include Colchester NHS Foundation Trust which was put into special measured on 14 November 2013.
default3.21 The number of trusts subject to regulatory action includes a high proportion of small and medium sized acute trusts. Monitor and NHS TDA have recently launched a research project to examine the challenges that smaller district general hospitals face and how they are responding; this will inform our approach to regulating them. In 2012/13 we continued to publish on our website the “matrix of evidence” for all trusts found to be in significant breach, in order to be transparent about our evidence-based decision making. Following the introduction of the provider licence regime on 1 April 2013, all formal regulatory action has been published on our website, including the nature of the actual or suspected licence breach, the grounds for taking action and the specific actions trusts are required to take to return to compliance.
defaultOperational and financial performance of the foundation trust sector
default3.22 The A&amp;E 4-hour waiting time target was a particular challenge for the sector in 2012/13 and has remained so throughout this summer. Monitor is working closely with NHS TDA and NHS England to ensure that trusts are planning effectively for the coming winter months, overseen by Urgent Care Working Groups. 
default3.23 The sector has improved performance against referral-to-treatment waiting times, cancer targets and the number of C. 
defaultdifficile
default cases. 
default3.24 In 2012/13 the operating environment faced by NHS foundation trusts remained challenging, with the long term trend of declining margins continuing due to rising demand for services and inflationary pressures. Despite these challenges, the foundation trust sector had a total surplus of £62 million after impairments (£487 million pre impairments). This indicates that the finances of the sector as a whole remain strong, despite 
defaulton going
default challenges and the significant issues faced by a number of individual trusts.
defaultAnnual plan review process
default3.25 Our annual plan review (APR) process for 2013/14 required trusts to prepare a three-year strategic and financial plan and provide us with board certifications on governance and financial performance.  
default3.26 We reviewed all trusts’ plans and commissioned a more detailed assessment of 13 trusts where we identified sustainability concerns or weaknesses in strategic planning, quality governance or overall governance. Trusts subject to formal enforcement action (as identified above) were not included in the APR process as they were already subject to greater regulatory scrutiny.
default3.27 Our approach to the APR encourages trusts to focus on strategic planning, thereby ensuring they identify at an early stage potential challenges to the quality of care they provide or their financial performance.
default3.28 The process also means that, where a trust has been selected for an in-depth review, it has a better chance of avoiding deterioration in its financial position or the quality of its governance. An advantage is that, if a trust which has undergone a more detailed investigation is subsequently investigated for a potential licence breach, we are already well informed about it.
default3.29 This year’s APR revealed that trusts are expecting a small decline in surplus margins in 2013/14: this reflects investment in an expanded clinical workforce. In particular, the proportion of trusts forecasting a financial risk rating (FRR) of 4 or 5 (indicating the lowest levels of financial risk) in 2013/14 decreased to 28% from 47% in 2012/13. The forecast decline in surplus margins and prudent planning by stronger trusts may be factors. We have also identified further likely factors including reduced scope for cost savings, shifting commissioning intentions, and the need to address national A&amp;E underperformance and the poor quality care problems investigated by Robert Francis QC and Sir Bruce Keogh. 
default3.30 Without fundamental change, for example through integration of services and service redesign, the sector is likely to suffer increasing financial distress. Given our findings and the sustainability concerns raised by NHS England, we are working with NHS England and NHS TDA to make significant changes to the way plans are developed by commissioners and providers. We are now implementing these across the system to improve the future annual planning process.
default3.31 Monitor, NHS England, the NHS TDA and the Local Government Association have jointly written to commissioners and providers informing them of changes to the annual planning process. As part of this for 2014/15, trusts must submit a financial plan with five-year projections, including two years of detailed planning and an additional three years of strategic plans. 
defaultGovernance and quality reporting
default3.32 The Risk Assessment Framework introduced a more holistic approach to identifying governance concerns. We kept the requirements set out in the Compliance Framework for reporting against key access and outcomes metrics. In addition, we introduced reporting against quality governance indicators such as patient and staff satisfaction.  
default3.33 The Risk Assessment Framework also requires foundation trusts to commission an external review of their governance every three years, focusing on key areas such as quality governance and board leadership. We see these primarily as an opportunity to develop trust’s processes and ways of working so that they can provide better assurance that they will be able to provide quality care on a sustainable basis. 
default3.34 Governance risk ratings have also been amended under the framework. Monitor assigns a green rating where there is no evident governance concern at a trust and a red rating where we have taken formal enforcement action under the 2012 Act. Where we have identified causes for concern with a trust’s governance but have not yet taken formal action, a description of the issue and the steps we are taking is published on our website.   
default3.35 This change means governance risk ratings better reflect where we have governance concerns and are less driven by metrics such as performance against national targets.  
defaultFinancial reporting
default3.36 Under the 2012 Act, our previous role of overseeing the overall financial performance of NHS foundation trusts was replaced with a new duty to protect the continuity of essential local services. In response to this, the new 
defaultRisk Assessment Framework 
defaultchanged the financial metrics we use to assess financial risk; the focus is now placed on a provider’s ability to meet its obligations as they fall due, thereby ensuring continuity of services. Trusts are assigned a continuity of services rating ranging from 1 (highest risk) to 4 (lowest risk) derived from two financial metrics:
defaultOther financial performance metrics previously used are no longer included within a trust’s risk rating. 
defaultAnnual reporting by foundation trusts
default3.37 Monitor consults on any changes to the 
defaultNHS Foundation Trust Annual Reporting Manual
default each year. From 2012/13, this manual has also been subject to approval by the Secretary of State to ensure consistency of financial reporting across DH related organisations. In 2012/13, minor changes were made to reflect changes to the HM Treasury 
defaultFinancial Reporting Manual
default.
default3.38 We continue to require trusts to prepare an annual governance statement with enhanced reporting on quality governance to be submitted with their annual reports and accounts.
defaultWorking with the Care Quality Commission (CQC)
default3.39 We have a Memorandum of Understanding in place with CQC, which summarises the ways in which we freely share information on concerns about providers. This happens at all levels and across all areas of our regulatory regime.
default3.40 For example Provider Regulation teams communicate regularly with CQC at both a policy and operational level through formally structured meetings and informal day-to-day discussions between provider relationship teams and CQC inspection teams. We take part in discussions with CQC alone as well as with CQC and other stakeholders, for example at regular risk summits and quality summits. 
default3.41 We are engaging actively with CQC as it develops its new inspection regime to ensure that our regulatory regimes are aligned; they should not overlap and there must be no gaps in oversight. We are also developing our relationship with the new Chief Inspector of Hospitals, Sir Mike Richards.
default3.42 One example of recent joint working between the two organisations is the development of enhanced regulatory action under special measures. We have developed a range of actions and provided resources to deal with trusts found to offer inadequate care in CQC inspections.
defaultImpact of Francis/Keogh/Berwick reviews on provider regulation
default3.43 We made significant changes in our regulatory approach since the unacceptable failings in quality of care and system oversight at Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust were revealed in 2009. We continue to reflect on and revise our approach in response to the findings of the Francis and Berwick reports and the Keogh reviews.
default3.44 Key improvements in our approach to provider regulation include:
defaultComplaints 
default3.45 As highlighted by the recent review of the NHS Hospitals Complaints System, listening and responding effectively to feedback from concerns and complaints is vital to the future of the NHS. Monitor contributed as a key partner and made three pledges as a result. These include helping trusts understand what best practice in complaints-handling looks like. We are also working with the CQC as it develops its new inspection regime relating to leadership governance and culture to ensure we are clear how CQC concerns regarding complaints could trigger investigation or regulatory action by Monitor.
default3.46 In April 2013 we set up a dedicated Enquiries and Complaints team which provides a focal point for all our contact with patients, their families, whistleblowers and other members of the public. It ensures that we listen to their concerns and respond quickly, sensitively and effectively. Complaints can provide a valuable warning sign about problems at an individual trust and we take them seriously. We immediately share details of complaints with the CQC and provide any other relevant help to ensure that complaints are received by the right bodies. This includes helping complainants access the NHS complaints procedure through their local trust.
defaultRisk rating major transactions
default3.47 Another aspect of our work is risk rating major transactions undertaken by NHS foundation trusts. This includes risk rating mergers and acquisitions as well as projects funded through private finance initiatives (PFI). We adopt a proportionate approach – the size and scope of the transaction determines the degree of analysis we undertake.
default3.48 During the summer we completed the risk rating of King’s College Hospital NHS Foundation Trust’s acquisition of the Princess Royal University Hospital (PRUH) site; this was part of the South London Healthcare NHS Trust which was subject to the Trust Special Administration (TSA) process. As a turnaround has now been required of PRUH, we will monitor the transaction carefully over the next 12 months.  We will include working with both King’s and CQC on an approach to assessing the changes to organisational culture that are required within this period.
default3.49 During the final half of 2013/14 we will review our evaluation of transactions so that it better reflects the requirement of the 2012 Act and the new licence.  Under the 2012 Act we can prevent transactions going ahead if this risks a breach of licence conditions and we can require mitigating action to be taken in advance of a transaction completing.
defaultSupporting NHS foundation trust development
default3.50 Effective leadership is essential in NHS foundation trusts. As part of our commitment to help them operate effectively and efficiently we support NHS foundation trust directors and governors to understand their roles and undertake them to the best of their abilities. Programmes run during the year include:
default3.51 We also produced publications that contribute to the development of the sector. In 2012/13 these included:
default3.52 We also run events and speak at conferences and events to develop leadership skills, improve knowledge and share good practice between providers. 
default3.53 Additional support is planned for the chief executives and medical directors of foundation trusts during 2013/14 as well as seminars and webinars for board directors on various leadership challenges. 
default4.1 The Enforcement Team has been established to ensure continuity of services. The team was set up in November 2012 to help us exercise our new powers under the 2012 Act.
default4.2 Individual NHS foundation trusts are referred to the Enforcement team if they have failed to implement the action plans agreed in enforcement notices or improve their overall position. By October 2013, the team had grown to 12 staff.
default4.3 The team undertakes more complex regulatory action including hiring and overseeing contingency planning teams (CPTs). The contingency planning process reviews whether a trust is clinically, operationally and financially sustainable and recommends options for further action. Such actions may include the statutory appointment of Trust Special Administrators (TSAs) to take control of a provider’s affairs and then make recommendations to us and, ultimately, the Secretary of State on how the services that commissioners decide must be delivered in the local area can be provided sustainably and to a good standard.
default4.4 In 2012/13, two trusts fell within the remit of the Enforcement Team:
defaultBased on the services that commissioners had identified as needing to be delivered in the localities, the TSAs’ draft report, recommended closure of some services at Stafford Hospital, maintaining services at Cannock Chase Hospital and dissolution of the trust. This was laid before Parliament on 31 July 2013. The TSAs are now finalising their recommendations following a 40-day consultation on their draft report. To allow commissioners and providers time to reach agreement on the level of additional funding needed in future to provide the services identified, and who will pay for them, we laid an order in Parliament on 21 October 2013 extending the time given to the TSAs to write their final report, from 15 to 55 days. The final report is now due to be submitted to us by 17 December 2013.
defaultOn 12 September 2013, Monitor accepted binding enforcement undertakings from the trust to address the CPT’s recommendations to reduce the Trust’s deficit. The Enforcement team will monitor the trust’s ongoing compliance with these. 
default4.5 The Enforcement Team is also leading the development of a joint study of services and providers in the Milton Keynes and Bedfordshire area to support local clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) to make decisions over future services. Both Milton Keynes Hospital NHS 
defaultFoundation Trust and neighbouring Bedford Hospital NHS Trust are experiencing financial and clinical challenges. We are working with NHS TDA and NHS England to consider the issues facing the trusts in the context of the wider health economy.
default4.6 Given the scale of the financial challenge faced by the health sector in the coming years, we expect an increase in complex regulatory action of this kind in the future and we are planning staffing levels within the Enforcement team accordingly.
defaultCommissioner requested services and location specific services
default4.7 During 2012/13, we worked with commissioners, providers and patient representatives on procedures to make sure that patients in the locality of failing providers have continued access to the health care services they need. 
default4.8 Commissioners are responsible for ensuring the continuity of NHS services in their local area. We support them in three ways by:
default4.9 Those services identified by local commissioners as needing to remain in the locality are known as commissioner requested services (CRS).
default4.10 Any provider of services designated as CRS becomes subject to the continuity of services conditions in our provider licence. These oblige providers of CRS to send us information on their financial stability and to accept further investigation and support if they do get into financial difficulty.
default4.11 Should a CRS provider look as though it may fail, local commissioners are asked to undertake a special review of the provider’s services to confirm which must continue to be provided in the locality. If the provider then goes into special administration, these services are termed location specific services (LSS) and the TSAs must ensure that whatever long-term solution is found keeps them running.
default4.12 Identifying CRS and LSS are new tasks for commissioners. We have therefore developed guidance called the 
defaultDesignation Framework
default, which sets out an end-to-end process that guides commissioners from initiating the work of designating services as CRS through to deciding which services should be defined as LSS in the rare event that a provider fails financially.
default4.13 The guidance is intended to be easy to use and is deliberately flexible to allow commissioners to adapt it to local circumstances. However, we ask commissioners to give evidence-based reasons for departing from the guidance and to notify us when they have 
defaultchosen to use a different approach. This will help us improve the guidance, which we will keep under review.
default4.14 To date it has been used by commissioners to determine LSS in relation to the CPT and TSAs at Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust and the CPT at Peterborough and Stamford Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust.
default4.15 CCGs have three years from 1 April 2013 to determine which of the former “mandatory services” provided by NHS foundation trusts should become CRS.
defaultThe risk pool
default4.16 The 2012 Act gave us:
defaultNo specific timescales were included for enactment of these provisions.  
default4.17 It was initially expected that we would establish a financial mechanism, known as the “risk pool”, from April 2014 to fund:
defaultThis pool was to be funded from a combination of commissioner charges linked to the value of the services they would designate as CRS, and provider levies linked to their level of financial risk.
default4.18 Initial work on the risk pool raised a number of concerns about the likely complexity and potential distortions created by charges that vary according to financial risk. Further work revealed:
default4.19 As a result, it has been agreed with DH that the introduction of a risk pool (and consultations on it) will be delayed until the sector has built up sufficient experience and evidence from the new arrangements for managing provider distress and failure. This will support the development of more robust financial forecasts and charging methodologies. In the meantime, funding will be provided by DH.
defaultEstablishing a single continuity of services regime 
default4.20 The Care Bill, currently undergoing parliamentary scrutiny, seeks to establish a single continuity of services regime covering providers which fail on quality grounds as well as those which fail financially. We will work with colleagues across the system to ensure its successful implementation if it is agreed by Parliament.
defaultRegulation of independent providers of NHS-funded services
default4.21 As previously set out, from 1 April 2014 independent providers of NHS-funded health care services will be required to hold a provider licence unless exempt.  
default4.22 We are working to make sure that the application and licensing process for these new licenses is smooth; new licensees are expected to include a range of independent providers of healthcare services, from large private companies to smaller charitable bodies. We are also developing our existing regulatory framework to apply to new licensees, with a particular focus on those independent providers who may provide essential local services. 
defaultMaking sure the NHS payment system promotes quality and efficiencydefault4.23 Monitor and NHS England are jointly responsible for the NHS payment system.
default4.24 NHS England decides what services will be bought and if those services should be standardised nationally. We lead on designing the rules  for price setting and calculating the national prices for these services. Collectively, the information, rules and methods that regulate the payment system for NHS services are published in a document called the national tariff.
default4.25 The design of the payment system is important as it can influence the quality of care by, for example:
default4.26 With NHS England we have set out our joint intention to use our shared responsibility for designing the payment system as a means of promoting patients’ interests. In particular, we want to design, test and implement changes to the current system which evidence suggests will ensure quality of care improves continuously for the same or lower costs. We need to use the full breadth of tools available to us as a regulator: from gathering and analysing cost and 
defaultquality data, to creating sharp incentives to change provider and commissioner behaviour for the benefit of patients.
default4.27 Our proposed national prices for 2014/15 are broadly similar to those in 2013/14, having been adjusted only for efficiency (4%) and inflationary factors (
defaulteg
default, the increase in drugs prices) to ensure some predictability of income for providers while we develop the longer term strategy.
default4.28 However, we have made changes in two important areas for 2014/15 based on our engagement with the sector. Following a review of the marginal rate rule for emergency admissions, we made significant changes to the way baselines and re-investment plans were determined locally, with commissioners held firmly to account for the first time. Local health economies will also be able to adopt alternative payment approaches where this is in patients’ interests, as long as they do so transparently and have engaged constructively on the available options.
defaultFigure 3. Timeline of activities undertaken to prepare for pricingdefaultDatedefaultActivitydefaultPurposedefaultFebruary 2013
defaultPublication of approved costing guidance
defaultWill help to improve the accuracy of cost data used for national price setting. Over time will enable comparison of cost and quality at patient level.
defaultApril 2013
defaultPublication of 
defaultHow can the payment system do more for patients?
defaultContained proposals for linking the payment system to outcomes that matter for patients. This introduced our belief that pending better evidence for alternative payment approaches, greater local experimentation should be allowed to ensure integrated care is not blocked by the existing payment system. 
defaultOctober 2013
default2014/15 national tariff payment system
defaultStatutory consultation notice for the 2014/15 national prices and rules for local price setting.
defaultDecember 2013 (planned)
default2014/15 national tariff
defaultFinal document (subject to the number of objections not meeting threshold). Published two months earlier than in previous years to feed into 2014/15 planning by commissioners and providers.
default&#xa0;
default4.29 We are currently considering changes to the payment system for 2015/16 as well as developing a shared long-term strategy with NHS England. 
default4.30 The spending settlement for 2015/16 requires a comprehensive analysis of opportunities for using the national tariff to signal where greater efficiency is possible, through productivity 
defaultimprovements or shifts in the way care is delivered. In particular, we are addressing the misaligned system incentives for urgent and emergency care and the proactive co-ordination of health and social care for vulnerable and ageing populations.
default5. Our duty to enable integrated caredefault5.1 Monitor is actively fulfilling its duty to enable care to be delivered in an integrated way where this will improve the quality or efficiency of care patients receive, or reduce inequalities of access or outcomes. 
default5.2 We are one of the national partners of the Integrated Care and Support Collaborative (the Collaborative), who commissioned National Voices to define integrated care for a patient’s perspective.  Integrated care is defined as making sure care is person-centred and co-ordinated across care settings and providers, including health and social care, and meets the needs of individuals and their carers. 
defaultEnabling integrated care through regulatory levers
default5.3 In most cases, it will be for commissioners, working with local providers, to design, develop and fund better and more integrated patterns of care.  We are not prescribing a single model.
default5.4 Our role as the sector regulator is to work with others, particularly our national partners, to remove barriers and consider how to enable integrated care provision. The requirement for care to be delivered in an integrated way will feature in our policies in areas like assessment, licensing, choice and competition, and pricing (the latter two will be developed collaboratively with NHS England).
defaultFigure 4. Policy areas that enable integrated caredefaultMonitor policy areadefaultHow we are enabling integrated caredefaultAssessment
defaultWe are yet to assess an integrated care organisation or NHS body that provides significant amounts of social care for NHS foundation trust status. Some trusts have expressed concern that Monitor’s NHS foundation trust assessment process does not sufficiently take into account the needs of organisations that take, or wish to take, an integrated approach to delivering services across health and social care. 
defaultHowever, we want to encourage such providers to innovate and have now ensured our assessment process can accommodate integrated care organisations.
default&#xa0;
defaultLicensing and 
defaultenforcement
defaultOur provider licence includes a specific condition that requires all licence holders not to take actions that could reasonably be regarded as detrimental to 
defaultdelivering care in an integrated way. We are currently developing guidance on this licence condition to illustrate how we would expect licensees to meet this requirement.
defaultNHS payment system
defaultOur design of financial incentives through the payment system allows us to encourage a shift to more integrated service delivery. The current “payment by 
defaultresults”system
default has often been cited as a barrier to it.
defaultThe national tariff, to be published in December 2013, removes any barriers to integrated care created by the existing payment system. Specifically, Monitor’s policy around local variations in the 2014/15 national tariff allows commissioners and providers to vary from national currencies and prices when this is in patients’ best interests. The local variation rules allow for innovative approaches to payment, such as the Year of Care (capitation) approach.. 
defaultCompetition and choice
defaultWe do not believe there is an inherent conflict between integration, choice and competition; in our view, integrated services that seek to provide the best care for patients will raise very few competition issues. An example of this is sharing patient information to improve co-ordination. If tensions do emerge, we will always take the perspective of patient interest and suggest remedies.
defaultWe have drafted supplementary guidance for providers and commissioners to dispel concerns that choice and competition might be incompatible with integrated care. 
defaultThis includes drafting frequently asked questions around integrated care. We hope that, as a result, competition will be cited less frequently as a barrier.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWorking with partners towards integrated care
default5.5 NHS England has a duty to promote integrated care and Health and Wellbeing Boards must also encourage it. The Care Bill will place duties around integrated care on local authorities. We are working with key partners to ensure that integrated care is made a reality, as no single organisation can accomplish this on their own.
default5.6 Together, the Collaborative set a clear direction through 
defaultIntegrated Care and Support: Our Shared Commitment
default (published May 2013). This sets out what good person-centred, co-ordinated care looks and feels like and how the national partners will work together to achieve it. It announced, for example:
defaultIntegrated care pioneers
default5.7 We provide pioneering sites with expert strategic planning support and practical advice on regulations that may affect their plans.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe will work collaboratively with pioneering sites to design, test and evaluate new, innovative payment approaches that support the delivery of integrated care (such as
default&#xa0;
defaultcapitation models). This will inform our strategy for payment and incentives. We will share the experience gathered from the pioneers’ activities. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPlan for assessment of progress across the system
default5.8 Integrated care should improve outcomes for service users and generate financial savings. However, it is widely acknowledged that high-quality evidence for improvements is not available nor can we easily. This makes it difficult to establish a baseline from which we can assess system-wide progress and the goal (set out in Our Shared Commitment) of making integrated care the norm by 2018. 
default5.9 The DH is working on developing a measure (based around patient experience) to be included in the 
defaultOutcomes Framework. 
defaultIn time, we may incorporate these measures into our regulatory approach.
default5.10 The pioneers’ experience will also provide a reliable evidence base to understand the improvements made in delivering integrated care. As part of the Collaborative, the DH and NHS Improving Quality (NHSIQ) are working to evaluate the impact of the pioneers programme on the sector, in addition to the local evaluation that pioneers are expected to carry out. This should help us to gauge which changes (around outcomes or efficiencies) have occurred as a result of the programme. We will also be evaluating the design of new payment approaches and, in particular, their impact on outcomes and experiences for patients. 
default6. Making sure choice and competition operate in the best interests of patientsdefault6.1 Under the 2012 Act, we took on new powers with regard to procurement, patient choice and competition. We established our Co-operation and Competition team in March 2013 when the staff of the NHS Co-operation and Competition Panel (CCP) became part of Monitor. 
default6.2 Competition at its heart is a process through which patients or commissioners choose which provider of care best meets their needs. The objective of choice is to help make sure that an individual needing access to care can choose, where appropriate, the provider of that care that offers the service that best meets their needs. The objective of competition is to encourage care providers to offer services that best meet the needs of their patients and commissioners, as efficiently as possible.
default6.3 Choice and competition are just two of the levers available to commissioners to help drive up the quality and efficiency of care provision.  They will not always be the best levers.  Sometimes, re-writing or managing contracts will be more effective.  Sometimes other levers might be best used alongside choice or competition.  In some circumstances choice or competition will simply not be appropriate.  For these reasons, it is up to commissioners to decide if, and how, the use of choice and competition would be in the best interests of their patients. 
default6.4 Choice and competition have existed within the NHS for many years and are now governed by specific rules laid down by Parliament, in particular the 2012 Act, and the Procurement, Patient Choice and Competition Regulations 2013. These rules largely reproduce the rules in place prior to the 2012 Act.  Their purpose is to make sure choice and competition do indeed operate in the best interests of patients, including by making sure procurement by commissioners achieves the best results, that all providers are treated fairly so that the provider best able to meet a patient’s needs is able to do so, and that no-one behaves anti-competitively to the disadvantage of patients.  Monitor’s job is to make sure that this all works the way it is meant to: that the rules are applied taking into account the specific circumstances of health; and above all that they are applied for the best interest of patients.
default6.5 We are prioritising two particular issues at the moment: making sure the sector understands how the rules can be used to benefit patients; and making sure our investigations are focused where they will have the greatest benefit for patients.  Our philosophy in doing this is that we must help people do the right thing – for patients – not punish them for doing the wrong thing.  However, if there is a need for us to investigate we will do so and we will take action to make sure any patient detriment arising from a breach of the rules is corrected.
defaultMaking sure the sector understands how the rules can be used to benefit patients.
default6.6 We must work hard to dispel any misunderstandings and help the sector understand how the rules encourage them to deliver better patient care and better value for money.  
defaultSpecifically we are:
default6.7 An example of the guidance we produce is the draft guidance on the Procurement, Patient Choice and Competition Regulations (also known as the Section 75 regulation) which we published in June 2013.
default6.8 Commissioners are responsible for meeting the needs of health care service users in a way that improves services. The Section 75 regulations provide a framework for doing this, which builds on the previous rules. 
default6.9 The regulations came into effect in April 2013 and our guidance is designed to help people understand the regulations and how they will be applied in practice. 
default6.10 The regulations and associated guidance provide a framework for commissioner decision making. They set out what commissioners need to think through in order to make sure that they are securing the best possible services for patients from the most capable providers. If the regulations did not exist, the only way to address poor commissioning behaviour would be via the courts.
default6.11 Our guidance makes clear that competition is just one of the tools available to commissioners to improve services. It is right that commissioners have the broadest set of tools available to them to do this. 
default6.12 Having published the draft guidance for consultation in June and consulted extensively with health sector stakeholders, including professional bodies, and NHS England, we are currently preparing the final guidance which will be signed off by the Secretary of State before we issue it to the health sector.
default6.13 The increasing number of requests we receive for informal advice and for our staff to attend workshops, roundtables and other events show that the sector is keen to understand how to ensure choice and competition work for patients.  We are seeking permission to expand our resource in this area.
default6.14 Commissioners and providers are increasingly approaching us for advice where they consider things are not working in the best interests of patients. The majority of these issues are resolved locally following our advice without the need for further action.
default6.15 Since April 2013 Monitor has received 90 requests for informal advice from providers, commissioners and patients. Many requests are dealt with in a single interaction while others require extensive follow-up work. 
default6.16 The ten most frequent requests between April and July 2013 are, in order:
defaultThese topics account for nearly 70% of the requests we received. It should be noted that these queries apply to the actions of both commissioners and providers. 
defaultMaking sure our investigations are focused where they will have the greatest benefit for patients
default6.17 We have powers to intervene to protect choice, enable integration and prevent anti-competitive behaviour that is not in the interests of patients. In particular, we can:
default6.18 We aim to have an impact in the most proportionate way available to us and our ability to intervene can often lead to issues being resolved locally without us needing to use our formal powers. 
default6.19 This year we have started investigations into three complaints relating to whether the commissioning and provision of NHS services are being undertaken in the best interests of patients.  These are:
default6.20 We also undertake studies to see whether particular aspects of the sector are working well for patients. For example, in November we published our initial findings from a study to review the provision of walk-in centre services in England: this examined to what extent the closure of walk-in centres has limited people's ability to choose where and when they access routine or urgent primary health care services without appointment.  
default6.21 In June we issued a call for evidence to better understand the challenges facing the GP sector in England and to identify what we can do to help address those. In particular, we asked for information on: patients’ ability to access GP services, or switch GP practice; the ability for new or existing providers of GP services to develop the scope of the NHS services they offer, including in new locations; and new models of primary care that local health communities are planning or considering and the potential barriers to these being implemented.  We expect to publish an update on what we’ve heard and any next steps by the end of the year. This is not a formal investigation under Monitor’s enforcement powers. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMergers
default6.22 Mergers involving NHS foundation trusts are reviewed by the OFT. Monitor is required to provide advice on the nature and scale of patient benefits arising from them.
default6.23 We work with the OFT to ensure we provide this advice in a timely way and to ensure an efficient merger control process. As of 31 October 2013, Monitor has provided advice to the OFT on patient benefits of three mergers: University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust/Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust neurosurgery; The Royal Bournemouth and Christchurch Hospitals Trust/Poole Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and a joint venture between University College London Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Royal Free London NHS Foundation Trust and The Doctor’s Laboratory Ltd pathology. The OFT cleared two of the three mergers.
default3.24 In addition, we are in informal discussions with providers related to eight potential mergers about the evidence that they would need to provide to us in order to assess patient benefits as part of a formal review process.
default6.25 Merger parties should be able to demonstrate what patient benefits they expect from a merger and provide supporting evidence.   However, the one merger so far that was blocked by the Competition Commission (that of Bournemouth and Poole) has given rise to concerns within the NHS that the application of competition law to such mergers – albeit that the law is intended to act in the interests of patients – might prevent or slow down the process of providers restructuring.  With this in mind Monitor, the OFT and the Competition Commission published a joint statement in October 2013 on public hospital mergers. This explained how the three organisations will work together to reduce the number of mergers requiring notification to the OFT and minimise the risk of lengthy merger review.
default6.26 Under these new arrangements, we will actively scrutinise and challenge the strategies of NHS foundation trusts, including emerging merger proposals, at an earlier stage. We will 
defaultoffer informal advice on how they might assess the prospective patient benefits of any merger and also on the possible competition implications of the proposal.
defaultOur impact so far
default6.27 Our Co-operation and Competition team is formally investigating three complaints that the conduct of commissioners is not in the best interests of patients. Individual patients who feel they have not been offered choices to which they were legally entitled have also contacted us.  However, we have only been operating the rules for a matter of months so it is impossible to make any meaningful assessment of their impact.  We will provide the Committee with further information on this as it becomes available.
defaultWorking with others
default6.28 Our Co-operation and Competition team has sought to establish positive working relationships across the new health care landscape. 
defaultFor example, we have worked closely with NHS England across a number of areas. The relationship is constructive yet reflects our different roles within the system, with NHS England as commissioner and Monitor as the sector regulator. Examples of this include:
default6.29 We remain focused on developing our relationships with individual providers and commissioners. We do this through a number of channels, including our informal advice service, formal case work and also through attending events on building sector capability. We have also engaged on a range of issues with representative bodies.
default6.30 Among our activities with the NHS Information Centre, we are exploring how we can support the launch of the e-referral service. 
default6.31 In our discussion with other regulators and competition authorities we have been clear that collaborative working arrangements must acknowledge the fact that Monitor, unlike many regulators, does not have a duty to promote competition. We secured changes to the Statement of Intent prepared in advance of the UK Competition Network’s launch to reflect this. 
default6.32 We continue to engage with the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills on changes to increase collaboration between the sector regulators and the newly formed Competition and Markets Authority when undertaking competition-related work. It has been agreed that we will have oversight of all competition cases principally related to NHS services.
default7. Promoting change through high quality analysis and debatedefault7.1 Everything we do involves working with other organisations.  It is essential that we have the credibility to influence other organisations that support the front line organisations who deliver care to patients.  Some of this influence will come through the formal mechanisms. However, as the sector regulator we believe that we can and must also seek to promote change by undertaking high quality analysis and using it to promote debates on certain critical issues.  Two areas of particular importance are:
default7.2 We are building an expert economics team to support our expanded function as sector regulator. In the past, clear evidence of what actually works for patients has often been lacking. Our economists provide cross-cutting research and advice on areas of strategic importance. This helps our Board and our partners to understand what is going on in the NHS and how this might change in the future, and enables Monitor to make a real difference to outcomes for patients.
default7.3 We are always focused on seeking practical solutions. We are therefore placing emphasis on recruiting a team with health care expertise and an ability to work collaboratively with colleagues across the NHS and other regulatory bodies.
default7.4 The team has so far published a report on local contracting in the NHS as part of the research underpinning the 2014/15 national tariff document. In addition the team is contributing to Monitor’s patient engagement strategy and improving our understanding of the sustainability of providers and local health economies. 
default7.5 Another contribution to the wider debate was publication in March 2013 of our review 
defaultA Fair Playing Field for the Benefit of NHS Patients.
default Our first major report to be published in our new role as sector regulator, the review was intended to uncover whether there are unfair aspects of the health care playing field that hinder the best quality providers in delivering services to patients. At the Secretary of State’s request, we have established a group to 
defaultoversee the implementation of the review’s recommendations. Chaired by Monitor, the group includes representatives from HMT, DH, NHS England, NHS Clinical Commissioners and the major provider representative organisations. 
default7.6 In addition, we have launched a project exploring if and how the capital funding regime for NHS trusts and foundation trusts can be improved. Following on a Fair Playing Field Review recommendation, one objective is to explore the potential benefits and distributional impacts of implementing a risk-reflective cost of capital for public providers.
default7.7 We undertook a major study into the challenges facing the sector in our report 
defaultClosing the Gap: how to get better value for patients 
defaultpublished in October.  This set out ways of in which improving productivity could close the funding gap and is informing our corporate strategy now out to consultation. Historically, productivity growth in the NHS has lagged productivity growth in the economy as whole. That has two important implications for NHS decision makers. First, to have a chance of closing the expected £30 billion a year gap by 2021, the NHS will need to achieve “more for less” at a higher rate than it ever has done before. Second, “one huge heave” will not be enough. 
default7.8 Achieving and then maintaining a higher level of productivity will mean making radical changes to the way care is delivered. The available evidence indicates a range of opportunities to make significant recurrent productivity gains across the NHS by 2021 and beyond. 
default7.9 We have also launched a “call for evidence” on the challenges faced by providers in delivering high-quality sustainable care, initially focusing on smaller non-specialised acute trusts. The findings will be published next year. 
default8. Making sure Monitor is a high performing organisationdefault8.1 Monitor itself must be a high performing and effective organisation
default&#xa0;
defaultif it is to deliver effective regulation to improve patient care by NHS providers. We believe there are two essential elements to achieving this. The first is to recruit, develop and retain outstanding people. In particular, we need more people with front line clinical and management experience. Secondly we need to achieve a step change in our approach to personal development, both to enhance our attractiveness to potential recruits and to maximise the potential of our staff.
default8.2 We also need to ensure there is a high degree of understanding amongst all stakeholders of our role and strategy, and how we believe we are making a difference for patients.
defaultMonitor’s staff
default8.3 We currently have 313 staff, an increase of 167 since we reported to the Committee last year. In this period of transition, we employ an additional 51 staff on secondment and interim arrangements; the majority of these will complete their contracts by 31 March 2014.
default8.4 The rise in headcount reflects the additional responsibilities given to us by the 2012 Act and our work to establish the required regulatory framework. We expect staff numbers to continue to grow as our new activities get underway. We expect to have about 450 employees once we are fully staffed in late 2014.
default8.5 All Executive Directors have been appointed, except for the Medical Director (whose appointment awaits government approval). This has delayed recruitment to the ten-strong Patient and Clinical Engagement team.
default8.6 We do recognise the importance to the organisation of people with a clinical background. A total of four clinicians have been recruited to our teams working in Co-operation and Competition, and Policy. Additionally, we have seconded five quality governance associates from the NHS
defaultFigure 5. defaultMonitor’s structuredefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default9. Monitor’s Boarddefault9.1 On 1 November 2012 the composition of Monitor’s Board was changed to reflect the requirements of the 2012 Act. This stipulates that, in addition to a chair and at least four non-executive directors appointed by the Secretary of State for Health, the chief executive and other executive directors should be Board members. The number of executive members must be less than the number of non-executive members. As a consequence of this, Stephen Hay 
default(Managing Director of Provider Regulation) and Adrian Masters (Managing Director of Sector Development) joined the Board as executive directors. 
default9.2 David Bennett was appointed as chief executive with effect from 1 November 2012 and continues as chair of the Board until the Secretary of State appoints a replacement. The non-executive membership of Monitor’s Board has remained unchanged since July 2012. Stephen Thornton, Monitor’s non-executive Deputy Chair and Senior Independent Director, had his second term of appointment extended to end on 31 December 2013 (it was due to end at the end of September 2013). This appointment was extended to enable the new chair of Monitor’s Board to be involved in the recruitment of Stephen Thornton’s successor as a non-executive director.
default9.3 The Secretary of State is responsible for appointing the chair of Monitor’s Board.  Recruitment for this role was undertaken in the summer of 2013 and the Secretary of State was able to identify a preferred candidate in October 2013. The Health Select Committee did not feel able to endorse this candidate and he withdrew from the process. Monitor continues in discussion with the Department of Health (DH) and the Secretary of State with regard to how best to manage its unusual governance arrangements.
default10. Monitor’s financial positiondefault10.1 Our non-capital allocation for the financial year 2013/14 is £68 million, including £48 million core running costs, £10 million for Contingency Planning Teams (CPTs) and £10 million for trust special administration. The increase reflects: our ongoing work regulating NHS foundation trusts and assessing applicant trusts; our new sector regulator role (particularly recruitment of staff to new functions); and setting up or improving processes, for example, information systems to support our new pricing and 
defaultlicencing
default functions.
defaultNovember 2013 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default