&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidencedefault from Dr Ruth Levitt and William Solesbury, Visiting Senior Research Fellows, King’s College London, Dept of Political Economydefault (SCE0020)default&#xa0;
defaultSummary default1. Our memorandum responds to the third of the questions on which the Committee invited views from outside observers: 
defaultWhat more needs to be done? 
defaultIn doing so, it takes as a starting point the ‘clear vision of the future’ in Chapter 8 of
default the Committee’s
default report on 
defaultSelect committee effectiveness, resources and powers
default of 8 November 2012 (Second Report of Session 2012–13, HC 697)
default, which 
defaultstated : 
defaultOur aim is that committees should be respected, listened to and feared by departments and ministers for the quality of their investigations, the rigour of their questioning, the depth of their analysis, and the value of their reports…Their ability to do their job will not be limited by constraints on access to information or the witnesses they wish to hear from, and they will be able to draw
default 
defaulton expert advice and research. (Para 136)
default2. We believe that these objectives 
defaultalso 
defaultneed to 
defaulttake into account t
defaulthe government’s commitment to ‘open policy making’,
default 
defaultas stated in its 
defaultCivil Service Reform Plan
default (June 2012), wh
defaultich advocates a greater contribution 
defaultto policy development
default from sources of 
defaultexpertise 
defaulto
defaultutside Whitehall departments
default.
default3. S
defaultelect committees increasingly need to identify, question and analyse these external sources 
defaultof expertise as an integral part of their scrutiny of ministerial and official performance
default. 
default4. Select committees should see it as their own responsibility to 
defaultpursu
defaulte
default 
defaultthis more thorough 
default’evidence trail’
default (somewhat like an
default audit trail for financial accountability
default). C
defaultommittee members and their advisers need to 
defaultenhance their knowledge and 
defaultskills
default in order to evaluate and comment wisely on the ‘evidence trail’.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultAbout the authorsdefault5
default. Dr Ruth Levitt and William Solesbury 
defaultstudy 
defaultthe 
defaultuses and effectiveness of the policy 
defaultexpert
defaultise that ministers and departments seek from sources 
defaultoutside Whitehall
default 
defaultfor 
defaultpolicy development.
default Their earlier work includes research on
default the contribution of outsiders brought into government departments as 
defaultdirect 
defaultappointees to the Senior Civil Service, as non-executive board members and as members of policy units.
default In 2012 
defaulttheir research on policy tsars revealed the growth in the scale and scope of such public appointments over the last four 
defaultadministrations.
default 
defaultThe
defaultir 
defaultnew research
default, 
defaultAdvising Ministers
default, will 
defaultevaluate the effectiveness and impact of 
defaultan even broader range of way
defaults in which expert advice is brought to bear on policy.
defaultOpen policy makingdefault6
default. The g
defaultovernment’s 
defaultCivil Service Reform Plan
default (June 2012) favoured what it termed ‘open policymaking’ and promoted greater outsourcing of policy advice as a step towards that:
defaultWhitehall has a virtual monopoly on policy development, which means that policy is often drawn up on the basis of too narrow a range of inputs and is not subject to external challenge prior to announcement….the need to maintain a safe space for policy advice should not be used to prevent the maximum possible openness to new thinking or in the gathering of evidence and insight from external experts.
defaultThe Prime Minister, appearing before the House of Commons Liaison Committee on 3 July 2012, expressed this from a ministerial perspective:
defaultWe should also recognise that the civil service does not have a monopoly on policy wisdom, so we have what we call policy contestability. On some occasions, we should go outside the civil service and say, ‘Here’s a particular challenge’ – for example setting up the green investment bank – ‘Can you help us O think-tank or O academic body, in developing this policy?’
default&#xa0;
defaultSources of external expertisedefault6
default.
default 
defaultIn 
defaultadvocating the 
defaultopening up 
defaultof 
defaultpolicy making, the government has given no comprehensive statement of what it considers 
defaultto be 
defaultthe appropriate sources of outside expertise. 
defaultOf course s
defaultome 
defaultsources 
defaulthave 
defaultalready 
defaultlong 
defaultbeen in use
default, such as advisory committees, researchers, respondents to consultations
default. O
defaultthers are relative newcomers, such as think tanks or policy tsars
default. Y
defaultet others
default, once much more frequently used, 
defaulthave fallen out of favour, notably Royal Commissions.
default 
default7. 
defaultSome 
defaultexternal 
defaultsources are commissioned on the initiative of ministers or departments to provide evidence or advice; others provide one or both on their own initiative in the hope that they will be heard.
default This is reflected in the 
defaultfollowing list of sources of external expertise:
default&#xa0;
defaultA. Minister or department initiates
default&#xa0;
defaultB. External source initiates
defaultWith ‘open policy making’ the evidential basis of policy that a select committee might wish to explore may well be drawn from 
defaultmore than one of these 
defaultsources.
default&#xa0;
default8. 
defaultThe utility of 
defaultall these 
defaultsources should be evaluated in terms of:
defaultand, not least important, 
default&#xa0;
defaultSelect committee practicedefault9
default. 
defaultS
defaultelect committees have 
defaultsometimes recognised 
defaultexternal contributions to policy development
default in their area
default. 
defaultRecently, f
defaultor example:
default10. These exemplify a common t
defaultendency 
defaultto examine such
default 
defaultcontributions to policy 
defaultin isolation, 
defaultpossibly prompted 
defaultby newsworthy developments. 
default  But 
default external sources of evidence and advice increasingly deserve attention in the more strategic, forward looking
default 
defaultscrutiny of department performance that the earlier Liaison Committee
default’s Second R
defaulteport recommended (in Chapter 4).
default 
defaultThis could either be in committee inquiries on a policy or in their reviews of departmental Annual Reports.
default 
default11. 
defaultSelect committees should see it as their own responsibility to 
defaultpursu
defaulte
default 
defaultthis more thorough 
default’evidence trail’
default (somewhat like an
default audit trail for financial accountability
default). Of course the term ‘evidence trail’ should not be taken as suggesting a simple, linear relationship between evidence and policy. It is well established that evidence and policy interact and influence each other in both directions and over time.
default12
default.
default C
defaultommittee members and their advisers
default need 
defaultto 
defaultdevelop their skills to 
defaultadopt a more ‘forensic’ approach
default in order
default to identify and question the evidential basis of department
defaults’
default polic
defaulties and policy intentions, from whatever source
default.
default 
defaultC
defaultommittees’ research funding 
defaultmay perhaps be 
defaultused to this end.
default&#xa0;
default15 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultEvidence-informed policy: what difference do outsiders in Whitehall make? 
defaultESRC UK Centre for Evidence Based Policy and Practice, Working Paper 23, 2005
default;  
defaulthttp://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/departments/politicaleconomy/research/cep/pubs/papers/assets/wp23.pdf
default.
default Policy tsars: here to stay but more transparency needed, King’s College London
default, 
default2012
default; 
defaulthttp://www.kcl.ac.uk/sspp/departments/politicaleconomy/research/tsarsreport/Tsars-Final-Report-Dec-2012.pdf
default.
default HM Government, The Civil Service Reform Plan, June 2012, p. 14.
default House of Commons Liaison Committee, Oral evidence from the Prime Minister, 3 July 2012, Q60, Session 2012-13, HC 484-i.
default