&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from defaultChris Hobbs, defaultRetired Metropolitan Police officer [CST0018]default&#xa0;
defaultI was born in London and have  lived here all my life. I come from a ‘police family’ and have relatives still serving within the force. My last ten years of service were spent working on Operation Trident related matters at UK and Jamaican airports. I have
default, however, extensive contacts throughout the Met which I have retained. I am aware of the frustrations of serving officers and their fears of expressing their concerns to senior managers for fear of repercussions. 
defaultI had personal experience of this when in
default June 2010, I wrote a letter intended for the press which, in addition to criticising Ken Clarke,  also referred extensively to crime figures. This included  the fact that damaging Met police gun crime figures had been excluded from the 
defaultMet’s
default annual report
default. I sought advice from the 
defaultMet’s
default Press Bureau and was told to submit it to them for scrutiny, which I did.  Despite that, I was hauled before my Chief Superintendent and accused of being 'unprofessional.' There was, so my Federation rep told me, a consider
defaultable body of opinion at the top of Scotland Yard that wanted me sacked. However they couldn't as I had formally submitted it internally first.
default13 months later I was forcibly retired albeit with a certificate of exemplary service.  My service record is beyo
defaultnd reproach and involved football related violence, Asian community tensions and international organised crime networks that blight the black community. Shortly after my retirement I was presented with a ceremonial sword and 
defaultsaropa
default (scarf) by the UK’s larg
defaultest Sikh temple. Despite this record  ‘dissent’ saw the end of my police career and this is the reason why ‘junior’ police officers will remain silent in the face of dubious police practices.
defaultThe officer, James Patrick is likely to be shown as an example o
defaultf what happens to officers who speak out. His decision to provide a submission to yourselves is extraordinary given the situation in which he finds himself. His book, ‘The Rest is Silence’ is in fact a restrained but disturbing critique of the police refor
defaultm process. He does not advocate any form of militant action by front line officers, in fact quite the reverse. By forensic examination based on fact, he casts doubt on the process and the motives of those responsible for it. The 
defaultMet’s
default  Commissioner  appear
defaults determined to send a signal to his rank and file that ‘rocking the boat’ will have consequences.  
defaultBelow is my submission in respect of crime figures. They are an amalgam of views from front line serving officers who are concerned at the machinations of 
defaultmanagers in respect of crime figures. There is also comment in respect of the Crime Survey for England and Wales which is also used by police forces to support their mantra of falling crime. 
default&#xa0;
defaultCrime Figures-Are We Being treated As Fools?
default1). 
defaultAs a retired 
defaultMet officer, I watched sadly 
defaultback in Jul
defaulty, 
defaultas a BBC London news report showed a builder’s experience having had all his tools stolen from his van. In a stunning display of efficiency, the next day he received one of the 
defaultMet’s
default standard ‘Sorry 
defaultyou 
defaulthave be
defaulten 
defaulta victim of crime-case closed.'
default letters. This in spite of the fact 
defaultthat CCTV footage 
defaultshowed two men removing the tools
default and placing them in a vehicle where the number 
defaultplate
default was clearly 
defaultvisible
default.
default2). 
defaultWhy c
defaultould this lead to rejoicing at the highest level
default of the police service
default? Quite simply because the 
defaulthuge 
defaultpercentage of the public w
defaultho won’t bother reporting crime
default 
defaultwill doubtless increase
default as a result of either viewing the programme in question or reading newspaper reports. This will  enable
default the mantra of cr
defaultime is going down to continu
defaulte to be sung from the rooftops as has been the case with the release of yesterday’s crime figures. 
default3). 
defaultAt least
default when Kent police were 
defaultcriticised 
defaultin the summer 
defaultfor the recording and manipulation of their crime figures, the P
defaultolic
defaulte 
defaultC
defaultrime 
defaultC
defaultommisioner
default and Chief Constable had the decency to 
defaultstate that the situation was 
defaultun
defaultacceptable and would be addressed
default. 
default4). 
defaultBut what is the truth around crime figures and how much reliance can we give to figures produced by individual police forces a
defaultnd the British Crime 
defaultSurvey
default now renamed the Crime Survey for Englan
defaultd and Wales?
default5). 
defaultShortly after I joined the Met in 1978, I 
defaultqui
defaultckly 
defaultfound out how crime figures could be massaged. Every Saturday there 
defaultwas a
default local market opposite Southall 
defaultpolice station 
defaultwhere dippers (pickpockets) would frequently be in action.
default6). 
defaultMembers of the public used to form queues 
defaultthat stretched 
defaultoutside the police station to report their wallets and purses stolen. Our instructions 
defaultas constables, 
defaultwere to report the loss as a theft
default only if the victim
defaults
default actually felt or saw their property being removed. If, as in most cases, they were unaware of the removal of their property, it was recorded as ‘Property Lost in the Street’ thus avoiding an unwelcome 
defaultaddition to the crime figures.
default7).
default 
defaultAnother controversial ‘massage tool’ was in respect of attempted burglaries. When burglars left ‘jemmy marks’ around window and door locks where they had attempted to break in but failed, the classification of the more serious ‘attempted burglary’ would b
defaulte downgraded to a more palatable and less serious offence of criminal damage. The same would be true where a window was smashed in an 
defaultattempt to get at the door or window lock.
default Does this still apply toda
defaulty? 
default 
defaultAny inspection worth its salt would unquestionabl
defaulty confirm 
defaultthat 
defaultit
default does
default. 
default8). 
defaultSimilar issues can be seen in respect of robbery offences.  If an individual surrounded by a group of youths, produces ‘upon request’ his mobile phone for them to ‘have a look at’ and that phone is then snatched from out of his
default hand, is that offence classified as a robbery or a less serious theft? Even where an assault has taken place, the offence of robbery frequently is ‘do
defaultwngraded’ to ‘theft and assault
default’
default or even just theft. 
default9). 
defaultI have even been told by serving officers from 
defaulttwo forces that crime victims are even being telephoned and asked to ‘
defaultunreport
default’ their previously reported crime in order to reduce the figures. An example of this would be where a car windscreen is found smashed by its owner the next morning and the police
default assumption is that it just could have been a stone thrown up by a passing car. 
default10). 
defaultThis is given credenc
defaulte when, earlier this year, 
defaultit was revealed  that Met Police Sapphire Units, responsible for investigating serious sexual offences, were persuading ra
defaultpe and sexual assault victims to withdraw their allegations. The reason; to boost their crime figures.
default11). 
defaultAcross London and doubtless elsewhere, officers normally of Detective Inspector rank, will pour over crime reports ostensibly to supervise them. In 
defaultactual fact they will be looking to ‘no crime’ or to reduce the classification to a serious offence illustrated above.
default 
defaultAnother trick of the trade is to send the statutory, ‘We are sorry you have been the victim of crime’ letter and then after the letter ha
defaults been sent, to reclassify the reported crime as ‘no crime.’
default The victim will still have his crime number in case of an insurance claim.
default12). 
defaultB
defaultut what of the England and Wales Crime Survey. For this report, around 67,000 households are selected, and then on
defaulte person from each of those household. A letter is sent and then, if the householder responds, the household visited by a BMRB (British 
defaultMarket Research Bureau) researcher who asks questions of one household member in relation to them being victims of crime
default.
default13). 
defaultSo, how likely is it that households on recession hit, gang dominated housing estates will invite BMRB researchers into their homes to discuss local crime. Will the drug dealers on those estates speak candidly to BMRB researchers about  being the vi
defaultctim of ‘run ups’ an all 
defaulttoo
default common crime in these 
defaultareas where one drug dealer is r
defaultobbed of his drug
defaults or cash  by others.
default  
default14). 
defaultThose working deep within the world of underprivileged youth will tell you that many stabbings and shootings remain unreported.
default Since hospitals have been required to report all knife and gun wound admissions (and many still don’t) a street level expertise has built up around the ‘self treatment’ of knife wounds with superglue while a cottage industry has emerged whereby both quali
defaultfied and unqualified back street doctors and nurses treat gunshot and knife woun
defaultds
default. 
default15). 
defaultOf course 
defaultfurther down the scale, 
defaultevery minor act of graffiti is a crime, every 
defaultdrugs
default deal (of which here are probably tens of thousands every day) is a crime, everyo
defaultne who p
defaultossesses drugs com
defaultmits a crime. I’ve received dozens of
default emailed requests in
default the last five
default months
default ostensibly from 
defaultPaypal
default a
defaultttempting to obtain my details and of course 
defaulteach one is technically a crime. Every other similar phishing attempt to extract 
defaulta
defaultccount details is a crime, every act of shoplifting is a crime.
default 
defaultOf course, mercifully for the government, these crimes will 
defaultfrequently go un
defaultreported.
default 
default16). 
defaultIt doesn’t say much for our modern society that these days, even medium sized stores have security guards but even where a shoplifter is unlucky enough to be caught, it is likely that that apprehension will merely be a blip in his or her career. For many s
defaulttores, big and small, the effort of embarking on a prosecution which could end up at Crown Court is simply not cost effective. Many major stores will merely apprehend the suspect, reclaim the goods and ban that individual from the store.
default&#xa0;
default 
default17). 
defaultThe most re
defaultcent British Retail Crime Survey suggests that retail crime has increased by a huge 15.6% and that most disturbingly; only one in eight shoplifting offences are actually reported to police. 
default18). 
defaultPolice have increased their target response times in line wi
defaultth police cuts which means that in the mayhem of Friday and Saturday nights, the incident will 
defaultprobably 
defaultbe over and the victim gone by the time officers arrive. 
default19). 
defaultWhere 
defaultpolice arrive when the incident is in progress the response is often to give indivi
defaultduals involved
default a fixed penalty notice 
defaultrather than to arrest them for a serious offence in order that those 
defaultsame 
defaulthard pressed
default officers can remain out on the streets
default and continue to deal with incidents
default.
default Thus again the result is a clear distortion of actual c
defaultrime figures. 
default20). 
defaultPolice chiefs will certainly be aware, as are politicians, that the public will be more willing to accept cuts if they 
defaultbelieve crime is being reduced. 
default21). 
defaultT
defaulthe sad fact of policing today is the fact that
default quite simply, nowhere for offic
defaulters to go if they are concerned with either poor operational decisions, facts being concealed from the public or even dubious practices that border on corruption.
default22). 
defaultThey are told to ‘go through channels’ but if there is no c
defaultonfidence in senior 
defaultmanagement or force
default  Professional Standards Departments then the only option is ‘whistle-blowing.’ 
defaultSadly police officers are not permitted to directly 
defaultcontact
default the IPCC. 
defaultOnly the bravest or very foolish police officer would now go 
defaultdown the ‘whistle-blowing’ 
defaultroad as there is currently what can only be described as a witch hunt against anyone who has spoken ‘out of turn’ to the media. 
default23). 
defaultRather like priests and nurses, those officers who do ‘go through channels’ to report concerns are likely to encounter a 
defaultl
defaultess than 
defaultsubtle and indeed sinister  form of intimidation which is aimed 
defaultagainst anyone who fails to toe the ‘party line’ or who rocks the boat. 
default24). 
defaultPolice parlance in relation to ‘getting shafted’ or ‘doing his or her legs’ is just as common now as it e
defaultver was and refers to police managers taking ‘unofficial’ revenge on the unfortunate officer who is considered to have not ‘toed the line.’
default25). 
defaultThe recommendation by 
defaultLord 
defaultLeveson
default, that officer
defaults
default are allocated a hotline to report concerns to are greeted wit
defaulth derision. Many officers will refuse to complete anonymous staff satisfaction surveys such is their distrust of senior managers. Those surveys in most forces show a staggering lack of confidence in senior management. (see 
default‘
defaultWhat do they know website
default’
default and s
defaultearch on police staff surveys). 
default26). 
defaultAll this is compounded now by what appears to be a witch hunt in respect of any officer who may have made some form of ‘non-corrupt’ contact with the media.  Rank and file officers agree that the Met and police service
default in general are on the verge of a very real crisis.
default27). 
defaultWith the national debt increasing, the recession continuing and life becoming ever more difficult, especially for those in deprived areas where gangs and criminality flourish, the 
defaultdubious 
defaultasse
defaultrtions 
defaultof continuing success in terms of police numbers and crime figures will
default count for nothing if we once again stand on the precipice of even more serious disorder than we saw during those terrible days in August 2011. 
default28
default). 
defaultThe bottom line is that whether cri
defaultme is falling or not, the actual number of crimes being committed is far, far higher than government ministers or senior police 
defaultofficers would have us believe-but of course falling crime is good news for both election prospects, promotion prospects and of 
defaultcourse honours. 
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default