&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Vincent Nolan (HSR 009)
default&#xa0;
default1. The last 
defaultindependent
default enquiry into 
defaultBritain
default’ railway system was the 2006 
defaultEddington
default Committee. Its findings were adopted by the then 
defaultLabour
default Gov
defaulternment in its 2007 White 
defaultPaper;
default 
defaultthey did not include High Speed Ra
defaultil
default&#xa0;
default2. In 2009, a government reshuffle produced a U-turn in railway policy: HS2 Ltd. was created as a wholly owned subsidiary of the Dept, for Transport (
defaultDfT
default). This 
defaultorganisational
default change effectively changed the role 
defaultof 
defaultDfT
default from objective evaluation of all transport options to a cheer leader for HS2. 
default&#xa0;
default3. The strategic case
default for HS2
default has never been subjected to independent evaluation. Recent revelations by Ministers at the time (Alistair Darling, Peter 
defaultMandelson
default and part
defaulticularly Rail Minister John Harris
default)
default suggest that HS2 was adopted primarily for electoral reasons, with little more than a ‘back of an envelope’ evaluation. The 
defaultDfT’s
default evaluations have been those of an advocate not an objective assessor.
default&#xa0;
default4. When the project
default has been submitted to independent scrutiny by bodies like the Public Accounts Committee, National Audit Office and the Major Projects Authority, it has been found to be seriously flawed. The TSC itself in its 2011 Report produced a list of recommendations
default to HS2 Ltd. which have been largely ignored. Independent analysis from such diverse bodies as the New Economics Foundation, the Institute of Economic Affairs and the Institute of Directors have condemned the project, as have serious media commen
defaultt
defaultators suc
defaulth
default 
defaultas the Economist, Telegraph Guardian etc. Public opinion is now firmly opposed to it.
default&#xa0;
default5. The Coalition Agreement included an intention to build a high speed rail network 
defaultas part of our plans for a low carbon economy. 
defaultThe TSC
default 
defaultconcluded 
defaultpreviously 
defaultthat cl
defaultaims for reduced carbon emissions from HS2 “did not stand up to scrutiny”
default.
default HS2 is opposed by the Green Party. In fact HS2 will significantly 
defaultincrease
default carbon emissions because of its ultra high speed specification requiring higher energy use and the transfe
defaultr of passengers from conventional rail services. It also encourages a vast increase in long distance travel
default, when a low-carbon strategy would discourage travel (as with the 
defaultDfT’s
default work from home campaign).
default&#xa0;
default6.
default HS2 is diverting resources from investment in 2
default1st century technology in 
defaultfavour
default of (
defaultsoupe
defaultd
default-up) 19th century technology. 
defaultFor example, we urgently need a
default&#xa0;
defaultnational
default&#xa0;
defaulthigh -speed 
defaultfibre
default-optic broadband network; we need to support transport developments like electric cars, particularly Google's driverless car 
defaultexperiment. In 20 years time, when HS2 is scheduled to be completed, technology will have transformed the way we do business, as it has in the last 20 years. The Government's forecasts of passenger numbers 
default(300,000 a day!) 
defaulttake no account of the impact of 
defaultnew technology.
default&#xa0;
default7. 
defaultThe successful bullet trains in 
defaultJapan
default and 
defaultFrance
default were innovations of the 60s and 70s. We are 50 years behind and the world has changed. More recent investments in HSR in countries like 
defaultSpain
default have brought no economic benefits and have co
defaultmpounded their debt 
defaultproblems. HS2 will have similar effects here
default.
default And the construction costs per 
defaultkm.of
default HS2 are 
default10 timesdefault those of European high speed railways
default&#xa0;
default8. The Government is addressing HS2 as a delivery problem, analogous to delivering the Olympics. 
defaultIt is a false analogy. 
defaultWhen a bid for the Olympics is selected, the bidder has no option but to deliver what they have promised; it is a commitment to the world sporting community. It does not matter how flawed the rationale behind the bid or how dubious t
defaulthe cost estimates were. The successful bidder has to ‘do what it takes’ to deliver to specification and on time, even if the costs increase fourfold beyond the original estimate, the Armed Services have to be called in when the private contractor fails to 
defaultrecruit the stewards required and immigration controls have to be relaxed to cope with the inflow of visitors. Anything goes, “whatever it takes”. But this is a most unsuitable model for HS2. The issue with HS2 is whether it is the best solution to the pro
defaultblems it purports to solve (which shift as the rationale for each one proves to be unfounded) and whether it provides good value for money compared with the range of alternative infrastructure investments it could be spent on. 
default&#xa0;
default9. I urge the TSC to call f
defaultor an independent, objective and thorough
default 
defaultexamination of
default UK transport strategy to determine whether High Speed Rail, and in particular HS2, is the most economic way of meeting Britain’s future transport needs.
default There is a real danger that the Government will rush into an irrevocable commitment to a bad investment, which (like the aircraft carriers) will prove too expensive to cancel when we 
defaultrealise
default we do not need it.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default