&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultDr. Andrew Blick, Lecturer, Centre for Political and Constitutional Studies, King’s College Londondefault (CRJ default10default)default&#xa0;defaultIntroduction and summarydefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe constitutional role of the judiciary if there were a codified constitutiondefault&#xa0;
default1. 
defaultAt present, the UK judiciary does
default not
default specifically carry out constitutional review, partly because there is no single express constitution
defaultal
default text to form a basis for such activity.
default Furthermore, the judiciary does not generally have a power to disapply or void Acts of Parliament
default. A broad principle of the UK constitution is that Acts of Parliament are supreme, and subordinate only to subsequent Acts of Parliament, which can amend or repeal earlier Acts either expressly or by implication.
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultA
defaultn important change in the role of the judiciary, were the UK to introduce a codified constitution
default,
default is that it might well take on a role in assessing the actions of public authorities –
default including Acts 
defaultpassed by the
default UK Parliament 
default–
default 
defaultfor their compliance with the constitution as set out in the text. 
defaultCourts
default could be empowered to quash those official actions that could not be reconciled with the constitution, including if necessary striking down Acts of Parliament.
default&#xa0;
default3. 
defaultOn the surface this change is a dramatic one.
default 
defaultIt could be seen as representing a shift away from a prevailing doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty to a system in which the constitution – held to be an expression of popular sovereignty – is supreme.
default&#xa0;
default4. 
defaultAdvocates of a codified constitution might 
defaultargue
default that 
defaultthis enhancement of the role of the judiciary would be 
defaultdesirable. They could find favour with the idea of 
defaultconstitutional values – including individual rights and the rules governing the relations between different institutions 
default–
default 
defaultbeing more fully protected. They might also welcome the possibility 
defaultthat fundamental constitutional principles could not be altered by simple legislati
defaultve
default procedures, but that a more demanding process would be required, as set out in the constitutional text
default.
default&#xa0;
default5. 
defaultOpponents of constitutional codification might regard 
defaultthis change as unfortunate. In their view, it might involve the courts – that lack the democratic legitimacy of Parliament – inappropriately involving themselves in political decision-making. It could also create consequent pressure for the politicisation of judicial appointments, s
defaultince legal decisions could hav
defaulte powerful implications for government public policy programmes.
default&#xa0;
default6. 
defaultHowever, assessing the change in the role of the judiciary that codification migh
defaultt bring about is not a
default straightforward task. First, in some models for a codified constitution, the judiciary may not be given 
defaulta prominent role in the upholding of the constitution, and may not have the power to void primary legislation
default.
default 
defaultThe Nordic countries, for example, restrict the courts in this regard. 
defaultIn his proposed blueprint for a UK constitution, Tony Benn did not envisage that the judiciary would be abl
defaulte to review primary legislation. Benn
default 
defaultpreferred instead
default to retain parliamentary supremacy.
default&#xa0;
default7. 
defaultSecond, 
defaultthough the UK judiciary does not expressly carry out constitutional review, it does 
defaultalready 
defaultconduct assessments of public authorities against principles that could well be regarded as constitutional in nature. For 
defaultexample
default, judicial review involves the consideration of whether decisions or actions are legal, rational and procedurally fair. 
defaultThese principles
default –
default which many would regard as fundamental to
default the rule of law –
default are
default 
defaultconstitutional
default, and 
defaultwere
default, for instance,
default 
defaultincluded in 
defaultt
defaulthe C
defaultons
defaulttitution of 
defaultthe Republic of 
defaultSouth Africa
default of 1996 (s.33)
default.
default&#xa0;
default8. 
defaultIt is conceivable that in future judicial review could develop a more clearly constitutional character. A tendency exists for the executive and other public bodies to publish codes – often without a statutory basis – setting out their core principles and procedural rules. These texts include the 
defaultMinisterial Code
default, the 
defaultCivil Service Code
default (that now has a statutory basis under the 
defaultConstitutional Reform and Governance Act 2010
default) and the 
defaultCabinet Manual
default. Feasibly
default courts could begin to use some of these documents in judicial review proceedings, perhaps arguing that they create a legitimate expectation that certain procedures be followed in decision-taking. By this means the juiciary could develop a greater constitutional role for i
defaulttself
default without full codification having taken place.
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultHowever, traditional judicial review, though it can entail quashing secondary legislation, does 
defaultnot allow for the 
defaultassessment of
default 
defaultthe validity of 
defaultActs of Parliament. 
defaultUnder the 
defaultHuman Rights Act 1998
default, the courts can go further
default than they can under judicial review
default. As well as striking down secondary legislation, they can declare Acts of Parliament passed both before and after the 1998 Act incompatible with Convention rights
default (s.4)
default. The role of the judiciary thereby 
defaultmeans that the rights contained in the Convention are enforced, and 
defaultensures that the 1998 Act, and the existence of the Convention in UK law, are protected from implied repeal
default.
default But it falls to ministers and Parliament to resolve issues of incompatibility. The courts cannot strike down Acts of Parliament
default under the Human Rights Act
default; and would probably accept as law an Act of Parliament that expressly amended or repealed the 1998 Act
default, that is to say the stated this intention specifically
default.
default 
defaultNonetheless
default, under the Act judges are required as far as possible to read legislation as compatible with the Convention
default (s.3)
default. In the process they can wield a great deal of discretion, even reading into the texts of Acts of Parliament words that were not included in 
defaultthem
default.
default&#xa0;
default10. 
defaultUK membership of the European Union, as provided for in UK law by the 
defaultEuropean Communities Act 1972
default, entails European law taking precedence over domestic law. The courts are able to suspend the operation of an Act of Parliament that
default by implication
default 
defaultconflicts with European law, as established in 1991 
defaultthrough
default the second 
defaultFactortame 
defaultcase. Yet, as with the Human Rights Act, 
defaultthe courts would probably accept 
defaultan Act of Parliament that expressly overrode 
defaultthe European Communities Act
default.
default Nonetheless, the judiciary is already performing 
defaultin relation to European law 
defaulta role akin to that which it might play under a codified constitution.
default&#xa0;
default11. 
defaultLegislation produced by the devolved assemblies is subject to full judicial review. The judiciary can assess these laws both for their compliance with the ECHR and whether they are within the scope of the Acts of Parliament providing for devolution. In this sense, the swathes of 
defaultpolicy 
defaultthat is 
defaultnow devolved 
defaulthave become
default subject to what could be regarded as constitutional review by the judiciary, where previously they 
defaultcame within the remit of the UK Parliament and its ‘sovereignty’
default (though ultimately the authority of the UK Parliament is reserved to it)
default.
default&#xa0;
default12. I
defaultt should be noted for the purposes of the present 
defaultCommittee 
defaultinquiry that the 
defaultActs of Parliament underpinning devolution include
default provisions for advanced scrutiny of 
defaultbills passed by
default the devolved assemblies
default,
default to ensure they are within the bounds set out for them
default, before they are permitted to become law
default (see eg: 
defaultScotland Act 1998
default ss.31-33)
default.
default Under a codified constitution, the courts might have such a pre-legislative scrutiny role, or it could be given to a 
defaultbody which is not a court in the more 
defaultusual
default sense of the term
default, perhaps an equivalent to the French Council of State.
default A process of this kind would mean that the constitutionality 
defaultof an Act 
defaultwas considered not only when challenged in relation to a particular case, but 
defaultthat it was assessed in the abstract.
default&#xa0;
default13. 
defaultThe UK Supreme Court now has a special role in relation to devolution issues. In this sense, it is beginning to resemble a constitutional court, and might well perform this function within a codified UK constitution. An issue to be considered is whether 
defaultany court could consider a constitutional case, or whether it would have to be dealt with specifically by a constitutional court.
default&#xa0;
default14. 
defaultFinally, 
defaulteven 
defaultwithout a codified constitution being introduced
default,
default the courts may seek to assert an even greater role than they already possess with regard to the review of primary legislation, when applying what they see as fundamental constitutional principles. A view exists that 
defaultparliamentary sovereignty is a creation of the common law: 
defaultthat this doctrine came into being because it was recognised in judicial decisions, and that judicial decisions could therefore
default supplant it
default. The courts may 
defaultat some point 
defaultseek to establish a more sophisticated hierarchy of law, identifying core constitutional enactments as protected from implied repeal. Possibly the judiciary could also refuse to recognise attempts by Parliament to bring about what the courts saw as abrogation
defaults
default of fundamental constitutional principles, such as a serious curtailment of the potential for the conduct of judicial review. Such a clash between Parliament and the judiciary would represent a serious constitutional crisis. It could be argued that the lack o
defaultf a codified constitution makes
default this kind of scenario more likely, since a constitutional text could make the boundaries clearer, discouraging both Parliament and the courts from exceeding their proper role.
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusiondefault15. 
defaultIt is likely that constitutional codification would expand the 
defaultremit
default of the courts, giving them a more explicit role in upholding the text. This new set of functions could well include the capacity to disapply or void primary legislation; and p
defaulterhaps provide 
defaultrulings on the constitutional 
defaultcompliance
default of bills before they 
defaultwere allowed to 
defaultbec
defaulto
defaultme Acts of Parliament. Such a role for the judiciary would be difficult to reconcile with the continuation of the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty.
default&#xa0;
default16. 
defaultHowever, the present constitutional role of the courts should not be understated. It extends in some cases as far as being able to suspend primary legislation. Established doctrines suggest that Parliament, if determined enough, can have its way. However, judicial attitudes and practices are not static, and may develop 
defaultin increasingly assertive ways.
default A codified constitution could be deemed necessary to restrain the courts, rather than augment them.
default&#xa0;
default18 
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default