&#xa0;
default              
defaultFurther submission from the Civil Engineering Contractors Associationdefault&#xa0;
defaultRe: House of Commons Communities and Local Government Committee: Local Government Procurement inquirydefaultFurther to our 
defaultoral evidence session of 4 November
default I am writing to provide additional information on:
defaultDuring the evidence session, I indicated that significant benefits might arise where greater forward visibility was available in terms of future investment by local authorities. The attached paper seeks to articulate how and where these benefits could arise. 
defaultWith regards to the improvement of EU regulations, we believe that it is not the regulations themselves that are causing problems, but the risk that is perceived by local authorities who fear sanctions associated with non-adherence to the regulations. Our members have reported that authorities will often cite rules EU procurement regulations as a barrier to market engagement with suppliers ahead of the publication of a tender. This approach aims to ensure that local authorities cannot be later accused of favouring a particular supplier. However, this also means that both clients and suppliers lose out on the vital early dialogue which helps to ensure that bids are procured in a cost effective and efficient manner by local authorities. 
defaultCECA members are keen to improve the status quo and believe that, in the first instance, a clear articulation from the Committee is required on the correct interpretation of EU law in relation to pre-procurement market engagement. Such a recommendation would seek to clarify local authorities’ understanding that such engagement is compliant with EU law as long as all suppliers are treated fairly. 
defaultWe would also like to reiterate our concerns on maintaining supplier commercial confidentiality when public sector clients are responding to Freedom of Information requests. CECA is supportive of the use of the Freedom of Information Act as a vital tool to aid transparency, but notes that there are some elements of a prospective suppliers’ bid which must be regarded as commercially sensitive and damaging to suppliers’ intellectual property (for example innovative design and processes) and thus should not enter the public domain. We believe that where such commercially sensitive information is likely to enter the public domain, this will act as a strong disincentive for companies to include this within their bids. This may mean that a local authority loses out on the benefits of these innovative approaches. In certain cases it may mean that some suppliers chose not to bid for work for the authority at all, recognising that to do so may mean that commercially sensitive aspects of their bid would be available to competitors, eroding their advantage not solely when bidding for that client but also in other competitions for other clients. 
defaultIn 2012 CECA worked with the Highways Agency on this issue, preparing guidelines to provide clarity for suppliers in relation to the provision and potential disclosure of information provided during procurement for contracts. These guidelines are a 
defaultconsolidated view of the industry that the Highways Agency can refer to in order to formulate a view or to use as reference when seeking an industry view.
defaultCECA believes that the guidelines support the principals of transparency, while sustaining a competitive market through protection of sensitive data. CECA is happy to work with the Department for Communities and Local Government and representatives from local authorities to establish similar guidelines for local government.
defaultI trust that you will find this information helpful and that our views will be taken into consideration.
defaultBriefing for the Committee on the Benefits of Forward Visibility of Local Government Investment
default20 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default