&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from
default  Nancy Neville (HSR 021)
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are in danger of making a serious public policy misjudgment on the issue of HS2 for the following reasons
default&#xa0;
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Government has not set out the objectives that the 
defaultHS2 scheme is meant to address;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Government ar
defaultguments in favour of HS2 are ex 
defaultpost facto rationalisation of a project approved for other reasons
default and
default not made public;
default&#xa0;
default3)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe cost-benefit methodology is flawed. It embeds the status quo (pre-eminence of Lo
defaultndon) where 
defaultone
default of the government’s ad hoc arguments claim
defaults
default to want to change this, ie the north-south divide
default&#xa0;
defaultGOVERNMENT OBJECTIVES
defaultAt various different times the public has been told that HS2 is good for various different
default things.  First there was 
defaultthe lar
defaultge infrastructure project to spend us out of recession. Next there was the wasted value of time on trains followed by overcrowding 
defaulton the line 
defaultand finally the healing of the north-south divide in income and property 
defaultinequality
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultBy not specifying what this
default project is meant to achieve, 
defaultand of course it is acceptable to have several reasons if they are all genuine, 
defaultthe case both for and against has been unclear and targeted to special interests.  Without knowing what we are trying to achieve, how can we know 
defaultwhether HS2 will achieve them?  This is different from doing a cost-benefit analysis.  This is about identifying public good and finding a way in which to achieve it.
defaultFar from being able to make a trade-off b
defaultetween country-wide benefits versus
default damage to th
defaulte environment, inefficient spending and a brain drain to London
default we do not know what the benefits are and why HS2 has been chosen as the spending project of the moment. T
defaulthe opposition knows exactly what the cost will be.  In fact, the only proper costing ha
defaults been on the side of the opposition to HS2.  Given this, it would be rash to move any further ahead with the project at this stage.
default&#xa0;
defaultEX-POST FACTO RATIONALISATION
defaultIn a 
defaultfrank
default statement
default to the FT in September
default, Peter Mandelson made clear that the project as 
defaultput forward by the previous government was an idea arrived at when 
defaultsearching
default for big infrastructural projects that would help to spend us out of recession.  As one of the industries most hard hit was construction, this lined up nicely and was put forward w
defaultithout any further specification or costing.  It is unclear why the present government picked up the idea 
defaultwhen times changed and the objectives (or 
defaultat least the government’s defenc
defaulte) changed
default. Several new ‘reasons’ were put forward. The time-savings argumen
defaultt needs no rebuttal, it was 
defaultembarrassing to hear it put forward and refutes itself on any reflection.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat of the argument that 
defaultHS2 would
default reduce crowding on the line?  I would need to know first, what of the other three lines cut from London to Birmingham
default (via Reading, from Marylebone and along the M1 corridor).  We are told a new line needs to be cut in order to be straight.  Why is straight necessary to relieve overcrowding? Why does it need to be high speed to reduce overcrowding? How does the cost of H
defaultS2 compare to putting longer trains on the line, running more trains, using all three existing routes in to Birmingham efficiently.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe most objectionable 
defaultrationale
default in favour is the one that it will heal the north-south divide. It is interesting that at t
defaulthe same time the British government is claiming that rail investment from London to the north will regenerate the north, the mayor of Paris is proposing rail to grande Paris in order to benefit Paris, ie bringing more workers in to the city and away from t
defaulthe (nearby) regions. Also, the Shinkansen i
defaultn Japan has aided development at
default the two terminals 
defaultTokyo and Nagasaki 
defaultbut economic activity in between has reduced significantly.
default Clearly a better model is needed to understand the changes in behavioural patterns 
defaultas a result of the change in both high-speed rail
default.  Further analysis would be needed to model behaviour given
default the reduction (in HS2’s own forecast) of local trains.
default Would local communities be hurt, would people use their cars more in consequence, would we 
defaultneed to subsidise fuel because we have forced people to travel by car etc.
default&#xa0;
defaultTHE PROBLEM WITH COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS
defaultThe cost-benefit analysis is a flawed methodology and this becomes most apparent when considering the ‘benefits’ to the north argument. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is not always possible in a public policy project to align the costs and the benefits but if they do align then the project is most easily supported.  
defaultHS2 could do this
default:  build the high-speed link from the north to the north.  Why not a high-speed link (if that is what you want) from Birmingham to Liverpool and Newcastle or Edinburgh and Glasgow?  If this were done then the same people who bear the cost of the line throu
defaultgh disruption due to construction, environmental damage, etc would also get the most benefit through connectivity.  
defaultThere may also be synergies that would allow companies to work with other companies in the region and to bypass London.  
defaultI do not know if th
defaultis is a good idea but I know that the costs and benefits fall more nearly on the same population. It may
default be worth exploring as mitigation of the north-south inequality.
default It at least removes one major objection that the benefits, if they exist, go to London 
defaultand terminal cities and the costs are borne in areas of outstanding natural beauty in the Chilterns, Warwickshire and Oxfordshire.
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, f
defaultor an
defaulty
default infras
defaulttructural project of this size in the UK 
defaultit requires the nume
defaultrical advantages of London
default to be positiv
defaulte
default: 
defaultit needs to be
defaultnefit London to tip the benefit-to-
defaultcost balance.  
defaultLondon has the numbers of people, the value of land, the proportion of GDP to attribute to a project to
default make it appear worthwhile. 
default 
defaultIT HAS TO BENEFIT LONDON
default.  In this case
default, if London does n
defaultot benefit then even if it makes sense for the north conceptually, cost-benefit analysis will not be sufficiently positive.  Cost-benefit analysis cannot be used for projects which attempt to change the status-quo. 
defaultThis will always be the 
defaultcase with cost-be
defaultnefit analysis:
default It reinforces the position you are in now
default and cannot be used to justify a new order
default. 
defaultHow do you benefit the regions when you
default need the project to benefit Lo
defaultndon to make it work out?  This is the flaw. The government claims to want to benefi
defaultt regions but to make the project show a positive benefit it needs to benefit London and the argument is circular and cannot do what the government claims.
default&#xa0;
defaultOf course, if this is not an objective of the project, and if the status quo is not to be changed, 
defaultthen my objection to cost-benefit analysis does not apply.  We do not know the objectives of the project, the government has not put them forward. First, the government must make clear what problems it is trying to solve with 50 billion pounds.
default&#xa0;
defaultI hold a B
defaultatchelor’s degree
default in mathemati
defaultcs from Dartmouth College and a
default 
defaultMaster of P
defaultublic 
defaultP
defaultolicy from Harvard University.  
defaultI have spent years both in my education and work applying cost-benefit analysis and decision trees to projects primarily in energy policy and th
defaulte environment in the UK, Europe and the US. I feel I have had sufficient experience to comment here on the difficulties of using cost-benefit analysis.  I believe that HS2 as it is currently configured is poor public policy and much needs to be done before
default a proper decision can be made.
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default