Written evidence from M. defaultWahlbergdefault (HSR 024) default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted by 
defaultMadeleine Wahlberg in a personal capacity.
default I am a member of the Offchurch Action Group against HS2.
default 
defaultI am neither a member of nor a donator to any political party and have no personal financial interest in any company or NGO. I am retired but was a university lecturer and researcher. 
defaultI have taken a special interest in EC TEN-T policy
default and in trans
default-
defaultEuropean
default 
defaultcitizen 
defaultgroups concerning HSR
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default1 Summarydefault&#xa0;
default2 Backgrounddefault&#xa0;
default2.1default 
default The most common response from MPs when asked a
defaultbout the connection between 
defaultHS2 and TEN-T policy is summed up by The Secretary of State for Transport who 
defaultvehemently 
defaultsaid 
default“HS2 has nothing to do with Europe”
default.
default 
default As this is patently untrue although oft repe
defaultated, it seems right to ask
default why there is so littl
defaulte 
defaultunderstanding of TEN-T policy
default 
default(or 
defaultsuch 
defaulta widespread refusal to 
defaultopenly 
defaultacknowledge TEN-T policy); 
defaultand whether the TSC has taken the same view or 
defaultis by contrast fully aware of 
defaultcurrent 
defaultTEN-T policy and its likely or possible impacts on the development of the 
defaultHS2 proposal
default?
default&#xa0;
default2.2default default Assurance on 
defaultTSC knowledge of TEN-T in relation to the HS2 proposal
default 
defaultwould be particularly 
defaultpertinent 
defaultin the light of the
default 
default“
defaultmost radical overhaul of EU infrastructure policy since its inception
default”
default 
defaultwhich has 
defaultbeen agreed by the European Parli
defaultament
default today
default. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3default  
defaultI wish to raise this issue specifically without raising any issues about whether the UK should 
defaultor should not repatriate powers from, or
default leave the EU. 
defaultNor am I
default interested in 
defaultscarem
defaulto
defaultngering
default about 
default‘
defaultEU control of UK transport policy
default’
default.
default Nor am I taking a view of whether TEN-T policy is 
defaultitself 
defaulteither positive or negative. 
default&#xa0;
default3  defaultSource of advicedefault for TSCdefault&#xa0;default3.1default  
defaultGiven that 
defaultit was the Secretary of State for Transport 
defaultwho
default said 
default“
defaultHS2 has nothing to do with Europe
default”
default,
default 
defaultI do not
default have confidence that the Department for Transport would be sufficiently informed about the latest TEN-T policy to provide TSC with 
defaultan adequate
default view of the issues in relation to 
defaultthe 
defaultHS2
default proposal
default.
default&#xa0;
default3.2default  As I have raised the issue of TEN-T policy on numerous
default occasions with HS2
default Ltd
default staff, and have had ill-informed responses, I do not have the confidence th
defaultat HS2 Ltd has any inkling of
default the latest TEN-T policy
default nor its potential impacts on HS2
default.
default3.3default  At the recent European Commission meeting on TEN-T policy that I
default attended in Tallinn, 
defaultEC staff who are central to the implementation of TEN-T had almost no understanding of the 
defaultstrategic 
defaultcase either for or against the HS2
default proposal. I do not have confidence that they could adequately inform the TSC on the impacts of the
default latest TEN-T policy on HS2. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4default   
defaultIt is my view that 
defaultt
defaulthe TSC should acquire an independent and informed view of the impact of the 
defaultlatest 
defaultTEN-T policy 
defaulton 
defaultthe HS2 proposal.
default&#xa0;
default4default  Possible issues of concerndefault&#xa0;
defaultFour areas are suggested here 
defaultas 
defaultinitial 
defaultexemplars 
defaultof issues that the TSC might wish to review
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default4.1default  
defaultThe reduction in priority for the ‘East Y’ arm of HS2
default. The latest TEN-T maps no longer show the East Y with ‘Core’ status.
default It is now not part of Core Corridor 8 (Cork to Marseilles). 
defaultThe line f
defaultrom Birmingham to 
defaultLeeds is now only shown with
default lower ‘Comprehensive’ status. A possible reason for this 
default‘
defaultdowngrading
default’
default or removal of Core status
default is that it reflects a lowering of the priority to build the extension 
defaultof HS2 
defaultto Leeds. There is a commitment und
defaulter TEN-T regulations that Core routes will be completed by 2030 but Comprehensive routes will only need to be implemented by 2050. Is the current status o
defaultf the East Y a reflection of a
default changed strategic case for HS2? Will this be reflected in a changed ana
defaultlysis 
defaultregarding
default the 
defaultinclusion
default of WEIs
default from the North East? 
default 
defaultIs this 
defaultlower priority status for the East Y 
defaultintended to reflect the way in which HS2 will be delivered cheaper and faster? 
default&#xa0;
default4.2default 
default 
defaultIn earlier 
defaultphases of TEN-T policy
default,
default the scheme that was identified
default to
default improve transport from
default London northwards was the West Coast Main Line. This was then known as Priority Project (PP) 14. EC funds were allocated to the modernisation of WCML
default 
defaultand the 
defaultEC 
defaultsinged it off as a 
default“
defaultcompleted
default”
default project.
default HS2 is e
defaultssentially taking 
defaultthe TEN-T programme
default back to the starting blocks
default by introducing a second proposal on a similar route to the already completed scheme
default. 
defaultAre there any implications 
defaultof this 
defaultfor the strategic cas
defaulte for
default 
defaultHS2
default?
default 
defaultWill this impact on the ability of HS2 to access EU CEF
default 
defaultfunding for a
default duplicate (HS2) proposal? 
default&#xa0;
default4.3default  
defaultThe HS2 proposal under TEN-T will have to satisfy the EC that it is conforming to a number of ‘design criteria’ such as environmental sustainability, contribution to the carbon reduction targets, limitation o
defaultn environmental damage
default, multi-modality
default and the involvement 
defaultof civic voice ‘from start to finish’.
default Does the TSC feel that HS2 wi
defaultll be able to match up to such 
defaultstrategic 
defaultcriteria? What will be the implications for the strate
defaultgic case of
default HS2 (including the ch
defaultoice of specific route)
default,
default if HS2 as currently configured is not able to satisfy such criteria? 
default&#xa0;
default4.default4default 
defaultAs part of the latest policy phase, TEN-T has agreed to a n
defaultew governance instrument
default for each
default Corridor
default “
defaultled
default” by a co
defaultordinator appointed by the EC. This goes 
defaultbeyond the existing Forums that have existed for some time in order to achieve inter-operability. The intention is that this will ensure that each Corridor is planned, developed and managed 
defaultas a whole, 
defaultand 
defaulton the basis of 
default“
defaultEuropean Added V
defaultalue
default”
default not nationa
defaultl added value. 
defaultHow will such a new governance instrument impact on the strategic case for HS2? W
defaultill it 
defaultimpact on the ability 
defaultto make 
defaultstr
defaultategic decisions 
defaultwith regard to HS2 eg 
defaultwith regard to ticket pricing, staffing, timetabl
defaulting, contracting for services;
default or at a more policy level
default, will
default it allow or prevent 
defaultpolicies on eg a public service ethos; 
defaultre-nationalised rail; the reintegration of services and infrastructure
default?
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusiondefault&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaultis submission has argued that
default the latest revision of TEN-T policy should be
default acknowledged and understood. 
defaultIt is that policy that will provide the European context for HS2 as a European project. 
defaultWe need a more mature response than the 
defaultfrequently 
defaultheated denial that there is any link between HS2 and TEN-T. 
defaultWdefaulte need to understand what defaultthe UK is committed to under the default2013 defaultTEN-T policy and whether the HS2 proposal conforms to thatdefault. 
defaultI hope that the TSC can take these issues forward.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default 
defaultPublic interview Kenilworth 3
defaultrd
default June 2013
default 
defaulthttp://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/news/ep-backs-new-eu-infrastructure-policy_en.htm
default The House of Commons Library Stand
defaultard 
defaultNote SN184 summarises some of the key potential issues, particularly in the discussion regarding the F
defaultourth railway Package, but it has
default not
default been
default updated by 
defaultall 
defaultthe 2013 decisions
default. 
default 
defaultA broad map of the UK 
defaultTEN-T scheme 
defaultis here 
defaulthttp://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/doc/ten-t-country-fiches/uk.pdf
default  and all 9 corridors can be seen in the 
defaultpdf
default at the bottom of this
default 
defaulthttp://ec.europa.eu/commission_2010-2014/kallas/headlines/news/2013/10/ten-t-corridors_en.htm
defaultA more detailed map of Core Corridor 8 is 
defaultattached
default.
default 
defaulthttp://www.theyworkforyou.com/wrans/?id=2010-01-12d.309628.h&amp;s=%28WCML%29+1935-10-01..2013-11-14+section%3Awrans#g309628.r0
default 
defaulthttp://tentea.ec.europa.eu/en/ten-t_projects/30_priority_projects/priority_project_14/
default Connecting Europe Facility (CEF) funds
default 
defaulthttp://ec.europa.eu/transport/themes/infrastructure/ten-t- policy/review/doc/com _sec(2011)0101_en.pdf
default   (p9) “
defaultpublic interest should lead to a continuous communication that imp
defaultlies a true involvement and would avoid the problems described.”
default It seems clear from discussions on the various media that many commentators assume that the UK will be in full control over all of these decisions in relation to HS2. That is less self-evident since the latest agreement in the European Parliament. 
default