&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Professor M. Geddes (HSR 031)
defaultBridget Rosewell  of the Volterra consultancy has joined in the debate triggered by the KPMG report on the possible economic benefits of HS2.  Rosewell
default rejects the criticisms of the KPMG study by Professors Overman and Graham
default 
defaultthat the KPMG work is insufficiently rigorous and the conclusions too optimistic
default (1)
default.
defaultNotably, Rosewell does not engage with the specific criticisms of KPMG’s methodology made by Ov
defaulterman.  Instead
default, in a rambling argument, she makes a series of controversial claims.
defaultShe appears to dismiss a statistically rigorous approach to estimating economic benefits, arguing that the available data is messy and imprecise, and ‘statistical rigour i
defaults not a substitute for careful consideration of what the issues might be and what the statistics might miss’.
defaultThis displays confusion about what constitutes rigorous methodology.  A rigorous approach is precisely one which assesses the strengths and limits
default of the data available, utilises it appropriately while making 
defaulttranspare
defaultn
defaultt
default how it is used, and draws appropriate conclusions which are justified by the methodology and respect the limits of the data.  The criticisms of the KPMG work are that it fell far sh
defaultort of such a rigorous approach.
defaultRos
defaulte
defaultwell then seems to try to 
defaultrubbish
default 
defaultserious 
defaultmethodological problems with estimating the economic impact of transport investments, such as the problem of causation, ie does the economy generate the transport system or the 
defaultother way around?  Here she says she finds it hard to envisage the former.  In fact, she need look no further than the Jubilee line extension to London Docklands, which followed on from, and clearly was a case of government responding to, economic developm
defaultent in Docklands.
defaultA lot more similar dissing of the possibility for a rigorous methodological approach then leads to the punchline.  Ros
defaulte
defaultwell ‘judges’ that  Crossrail will ‘generate total output returns of around £80bn on an investment of £15bn
default’
default and theref
defaultore HS2’s investment of ‘around £40bn should, based on analogy like this, generate £200bn in new jobs, incomes, additional commuting to productive centres, taxes, dividends and so on.  This kind of broad, historically informed analysis is in line with the 
defaultsort of results that KPMG have generated’.
defaultNow this is curious, because 
defaultit
default was Bridget Rosewell ‘s Volterra who 
defaulthelped to 
defaultproduce the assessment of the economic benefits of Crossrail
default (2)
default.  This 
defaulthas been updated several times, and the latest (2007) version 
defaultestimates the 
defaultGDP 
defaultbenefits 
defaultover 60 years 
defaultfrom Crossrail under three economic scenarios – high, mid and low.  
defaultThe 
default(unlikely) 
defaulthigh figure is only £67bn, while the low one is £36bn, 
defaultand
default all of these are considerably higher than the earlier estimate in 2005 of
default £20bn.  This raises two issues.  In the first place, 
defaultBuchanan/
defaultVolterra’s work on Crossrail purports to employ the kind of rigorous methodology which 
defaultRosewell
default now seems to dismiss.  Secondly, none of the 
defaultfigures are anywhere near the £80bn which Ros
defaulte
defaultwell n
defaultow ‘judges’ to be valid.  So where does this 
default‘
defaultjudgement
default’
default come from?  Surely not 
defaultjust 
defaultfrom a desire to come up with a figure which helps to bolster the much-criticised KPMG work? 
defaultThe conclusion to be drawn from this is that ‘judgement’ must not be allowed 
defaultto substitute for a rigorous assessment of the case for and against HS2, in which both quantitative and qualitative data 
defaultand evidence 
defaultare
default carefully and honestly analysed.  Where ‘hard’ evidence can usefully be supplemented by Judgement, the basis upon whic
defaulth the judgement is made needs to be set out fully and transparently.
default&#xa0;
default1. 
defaulthttp://volterra.co.uk/statistical-rigour-and-hs2/
default2.The Economic Benefits of Crossrail
default.  Colin Buchanan and Partners with Volterra.  2007
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default