&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultBiblioFox
default Research (HSR 033)
default&#xa0;
default1. 
defaultBiblioFox
default Research is a research consultancy established in 2000. We specialise in document-based research and archival research and have recently been 
defaultinvestigating the implications of the HS2 business case for existing intercity services on the West Coast, East Coast and Midland Main Lines.
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultIn our opinion 
defaultthere is a fundamental contradiction at the heart of the HS2 strategic case.  This concerns pla
defaultn
defaults
default to divert 
defaultnorth-south 
defaultintercity travellers to HS2 
defaultservices
default and remove 
defaulta high number of 
default‘classic’ 
default(
defaulti.e
default 
defaulttraditional
default)
default intercity services from 
defaultthe 
defaultexisting 
defaultnorth-south 
defaultlines
default, 
defaultthus 
defaultfreeing those lines 
defaultfor more commuter, regional and freight services.  We 
defaultexp
defaultlain 
defaultthis contradiction below.
default&#xa0;
default3. On the one hand, the Government says its aim is that “all towns and cities which currently have a direct service to London will retain broadly comparable or better services once HS2 is completed”
default (Strategic C
defaultase, 4.2.6).
default 
defaultOn the other, it proposes that long distance services are diverted onto HS2, freeing capacity on the existing network for new services (
defaultStrateg
defaultic C
defaultase, Executive Summary, 
defaultpara
default 57). 
default Figure 10 (
defaultStrategic Case 
defaultp.24) shows how, with HS2 taking 
defaultresponsibility 
defaultfor 
defaultmost long-distance services, the number of commuter services into Euston can be increased greatly. 
default 
defaultThe same figure shows
default, 
defaultthough, 
defaultthat this comes through a 
defaultmassive reduction in classic intercity 
defaultservices
default.
default&#xa0;
default4. While it might be assumed that many passen
defaultgers travelling between cities 
defaultsuch as Manchester, Birmingham and London 
defaultwill be happy to use HS2 services instead of the classic intercity services that 
defaultHS2
default will replace, 
defaultHS2 cannot – by its nature – 
defaultexactly 
defaultreplicate the current north-south intercity 
defaulttimetables on the West Coast, East Coast and Midland Main Line
defaults
default.  It will call at far fewer stations than current intercity services. If classi
defaultc intercity services are reduce
defaultd in number, the 
defaulttowns and cities 
defaultnot served by HS2 trains, such as Stoke-on-Trent
default, Wilmslow and Stockport on the WCML, Leicester on the MML
default,
default and Wakefield and Doncaster on the ECML, will 
defaultalmost certainly 
defaultface 
defaultreduction
defaults
default in 
defaultdirect services to London.
default&#xa0;
default5. Despite the Government’s claim that all towns and cities currently with direct serv
defaultices to London should receive broadly comparable or better services, and that decisions on future services will be taken nearer the time, its own business case for HS2 
defaultis predicated on 
defaultsignificant 
defaultsavings 
defaultbeing made through 
defaultreductions in 
defaultintercity services
default on existing lines. 
defaultThese 
default‘
defaultclassic line 
defaultsavings’ 
defaultare a fundamental part of the business case, yet do not appear to be mentioned in the 
defaultStrategic Case document.  They may be found instead in 
defaultThe Economic Case for HS2 
default(October 2013) at
default 
defaulthttp://assets.hs2.org.uk/sites/default/files/inserts/S%26A%201_Economic%20case_0.pdf
default (Table 9). This reveals that 
defaultsavings of £8.2 billion are being 
defaultused to 
defaultoffset 
defaultpart of 
defaultthe pr
defaultedicted cost of operating HS2, thus reducing the ‘headline’ 
defaultoperating cost
default.  The 
defaultactual cost of operating the full HS2 network over the 60 year appraisal period is calculated to be £30,408 million.  Offset against this are savings from reductions in spendi
defaultng on the existing 
defaultlins
default of £8,265 million (savings on staff, electricity, diesel, lease costs, maintenance etc). This gives a headline figure 
defaultfor the cost of operating HS2 
defaultof £22,143.  It is this latter figure that is used in the 
defaultHS2 business case benefit-
defaultcost ratio (
defaultBCR
default)
default.  If all these classic savings were not to materialise, the BCR would 
defaultof course 
defaultbe 
defaultsignificantly 
defaultlower.
default&#xa0;
default6. The reductions in classic line intercity services that 
defaultmake up 
defaultth
defaultose 
default£8.2 billion 
defaultof savings 
defaultmay be found in 
defaultHS2 Ltd’s report 
defaultPFM 
defaultV.4.3 Assumptions report
default 
defaulthttp://assets.hs2.org.uk/sites/default/files/inserts/S%26A%2020_PFM%20assumptions%20report.pdf
default(section 6.4).  Comparing
default the proposed classic line 
defaultintercity 
defaultservice patterns with today’s intercity services revea
defaultls that:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default7. In conclusion, the Government’s claim that no towns and cities will face worse services to London appears t
defaulto be in conflict with its incorporation of £8.2 billion of classic line savings into the business case for HS2.  Without the
defaultse
default savings, the HS2 BCR will fall
default significantly
default, but with them, it will be 
defaultextremely 
defaultdifficult, we believe, to maintain 
defaultthe level
defaults
default of service 
defaultto 
defaultusers of 
defaultcurrent intercity services
default to London
default that the Government claims is their aim
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default