&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence
default from William Cash MP (SLC 043)
defaultDear Louise,
defaultRe: Level-crossing at Wedgwood station, Barlaston - rail fatalitiesdefaultI understand that the Transport Select Committee has been receiving evidence on safety at level crossings. I wanted to let you know that I have made ongoing representations and held several meetings with Network Rail, the Samaritans, the Law Commission, t
defaulth
defaulte Office of Rail Regulation and the British Transport Police in my constituency which relate to the level-crossing at Wedgwood railway station in Barlaston.
defaultI am always saddened to hear of these incidents and I have made ongoing representations on rail s
defaultafety, as the legislation on rail safety really needs to be improved.
defaultA part of my concern is that the level crossing has become a location for people killing themselves, as well as accidents. In June 2013, a number of my constituents became the first re
defaultsidents in Britain to be given specialist training to stop people committing suicide on railway lines near their homes. They were shown how to recognise certain signs of strangers who may be about to kill themselves- and how best to stop them jumping in f
defaultr
defaultont of trains. It was a course delivered by the Samaritans after a number of people in the area have been killed by trains over the past 18months. There is a fear that victims are being attracted to the level­
default crossing at Wedgwood. Over the summer, again,
default 
defaultin July, we had our eighth train death in 18 months at Wedgwood station. On that occasion, the victim was struck by a Manchester-to-London train as it passed through Wedgwood Railway Station in Barlaston. Where there have been other fatalities at that poi
defaultn
defaultt, there have been proposals from myself and from my constituents, for example, for safer fencing near the line.
defaultOf interest to you may be that at one such meeting I held with residents at Barlaston Village Hall on 1st March this year, with Network Rail 
defaultofficials and also ian Prosser, Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Railways, it was suggested by Network Rail representatives that special cameras which detect movement be used to prevent rail deaths near Barlaston. Network Rail representatives told me at t
defaulth
defaultat meeting that it was considering conducting a trial of CCTV technology in the area. Using technology that detects movement past certain points, they would effectively be monitoring vulnerable areas. My understanding that if someone was detected it would
default 
defaultsend a message to the operators, who would communicate with the trains.
defaultAs a result of that meeting and other representations, it was only then very recently, in October this year that CCTV and sensors have been installed to prevent deaths on railway. Th
defaultere is now CCTV in place between Stoke Station and Stone. I am told that the footage will be used to warn drivers to slow down or stop their trains because a person is on the line and it is the first time Network Rail has used CCTV to monitor possible sui
defaultc
defaultide attempts on train tracks in the UK. Network Rail officials themselves make clear that this is the first time this technology has been used in the UK and are monitoring its effectiveness closely- and I wanted to bring this important matter to your atte
defaultn
defaulttion wh
defaulten  assessing level-crossings. 
defaultAn
defaultd
default I would be glad to give oral evidence.
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default