LGO15
defaultSubmissiondefault defaultfromdefault defaultDrdefault defaultPaulinedefault defaultAshbridgedefault&#xa0;defaultAs a present
default complainant
default, I am currently awaiting the result of a Review by the LGO's new Assessment team of their decision 
defaultnot
default to pass on my Complaint (and similar complaints by others) against a council to the LGO's Investigation team.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis perspective will, I hope, be 
defaultuseful
default  As the Review result is not yet known, my comments cannot be unduly influenced by an adverse decision. Secondly, the July 2012 Report summary says: "During this period of 
defaultcha
defaultnge it is 
defaultessentia
defaultl that the LGO 
defaultkee
defaultps 
defaulta
default close eye on the 
defaulteff
defaultects of the
default 
defaultchanges on those using its services 
defaulta
defaultnd on its staff."  As this Enquiry is reviewing these LGO
default 
defaultchanges, comments by someone currently "using its services", will be relevant,  l hope.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs the committee  does not examine details of individual cases, I shall avoid these as much as possible. I am an historian and a retired lecturer in business management and public administration. l was one of 18 or 19 individuals 
default(not
default an 
defaultorganisation
default, and 
defaultotherw
defaultise 
defaultunk
defaultn
defaultown
default to each 
defaultoth
defaulter) who
default 
defaultsubmitted similar  but separate complaints to the London Borough of Barnet about serious maladministration in the decision-making processes that 
defaultl
defaulted to approval of an application to enclose 
defaulta five
default-ward multicultural area within 
defaultan
default 
defaultEru
defaultv
default religious boundary.
default Th
defaulte council  
defaultrejecte
defaultd the complaints and advised each person about the Ombudsman service.
default&#xa0;
defaultI have linked my remarks below to recent and present Enquiries into the LGO
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe new Assessment Unit
default structure is placing too much (almost unaccountable) power
default in the hands of individuals. 
defaultTheir brief is to filter OUT (not 
defaultfilter in). 
defaultSuccess is measured by the
default proportion of cases re
defaultjected at this first stage (as the LGO's statistics and commentaries show).
default&#xa0;
defaultMany cases must hav
defaulte been unreasonably rejected. 
defaultI myself would have given up at this ea
defaultrly stage if it had not been fo
defaultr a number of exceptional factors:
default 
defaultthe mass of hard evidence o
defaultf maladministration available i
defaultn the form
default of Planning Committee papers;
default 
defaultF.o.l
default. access to objecti
defaultons submitted to the council; t
defaulthe availability on-line of a 
defaultfilm of the Planning Committee meeting (fil
defaultming p
defaultermitted
default by the 
defaultcouncil
default);  the repetition of
default 
defaultunmistakable
default 
defaultmaladministration in a 
defaultneighboring
default similar 
defaultEruv
default application three weeks later.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs a former journalist (newspaper reporter) as well as a retired lecturer in public administration, I was also in a position to 
defaultun
defaultde
defaultrstand t
defaulthat commen
defaultts by members of the public as t
defaulthey left the council meeting- "It's a done deal
default!"; "A travesty!"- were justifie
defaultd.
default&#xa0;
defaultSu
defaultstained by these factors, and also by the knowledge that other (well-qualified) residents were similarly indignant at Barnet Council's maladministration, I have been able to persist d
defaultespite the Assessment Unit's ne
defaultgative targets. Many other compla
defaultinants will not have been so fortunate
default.
default&#xa0;defaultThe following aredefault examples of "filtering-out" defaultmethodsdefault employed by the Assessment Unit "idefaultnvdefaultestdefaultigator" allocated to my case. I am calling him "M" the first lettdefaulter of his surname):default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default"M" insisted 
defaultthat he a
defaultlone was dealing with my case, and this was 
defaultemphasised
default by several other staff in Coventry and at Millbank, London, to whom I spo
defaultke from time to time. 
default"M" appeared to claim owner
defaultship of the case, and clearly ob
defaultjected when (unusually) one person on the staf
defaultf passed on to him a substantiat
defaulted criticism 
defaultI made.
default "M" would perhaps claim he was exercising legitimate "independent 
defaultjudgment
default" -however ill-informed that might be.
default I was able, probably because of
defaultmy past j
defaultournalistic experience, to pers
defaultist in contacting other people, but many complainants would hesitate to do this and would accept rejection of their viable case at a very early stage.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultBoth of these 
defaultstandard filtering-out grounds
default were combined by "M" as his reason for rejecting
default what 
defaultwas potentially a major case of malad
defaultministration by a council, with
default indisputable evidence in
default the council's own published docu
defaultments. I 
defaultwould ask to what extent, if any, he was req
defaultuired, as an "investigator" in the 
defaultAssessment
default Unit, t
defaulto examine the actual evidence? 
defaultIs 
defaultit simply a tick-box approach: 
defaultfinding, metaphorically or actually, a box to tick, 
defaultand t
defaulthen moving on to the next 
defaultcase
default?
default(See also: 
defaultLGO’s Progress Report, 1 Oct 2013: “We have introduced a clear template for our decision statements… format clearly identifies the evidence and any other consideration that we have relied on in reaching a decision.” Does that template support over-rapid “filtering” of cases?)
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultI recei
defaultved a standard letter fr
defaultom Dr. Jane Martin, Ombudsman, inviting me to an advisory Forum in Coventry, to include members of
default 
defaultthe public who had used the service in the last six months.
default&#xa0;
defaultInterested persons had to send "a short statement, of no more than 500 words, explaining why you
default wou
defaultld like to be involved and details of any other rel
defaultevant experience you have...
default Decisions on
default who will be appointed to the fo
defaultrum will be based solely upon the statement".
default&#xa0;
defaultI did not respond 
defaultbecause it seemed to me to be an
default ina
defaultppropriate invitation.
default People who were critical of the service might clearly wish to attend- but the choice of participants would be, it seems, in the hands of the 
defaultorganisation
default they wished to 
defaultcriticise
default. A more informative and open
default met
defaulthod might
default 
defaultbe a questionnaire sent
default 
defaultafter
default completion of 
defaulteach
default 
defaultc
defaultase: whether rejected or supporte
defaultd by 
defaultthe
default LGO.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThese goals will only be 
defaultrealisable
default if the summary statements are produced with demonstrable integrity and understanding.
default              
default"M" produced an unbalanced "
defaultfinal
default decision statement", as follows:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default11 November 2013
default