BRC24
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence from Pro Electrical Services (defaultBredondefault)default&#xa0;
defaultI am an Electrical Contractor working in both Domestic and Commercial properties. I have been with 2 different Part P Scheme providers. I would make the following points to the Committee :-
defaultVery few
default people are aware of the need to use a registered Electrician. I have a guy living near me who is a labourer for a local Electrical Company. He has rewired/partial rewired 3 houses in my street. They have not been notified or tested. My options are report 
defaulthim and watch nothing happen or forget it. This is not acceptable. If he was installing gas systems then that would have a different reaction from LABC and the 
defaultspecifier
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Part P scheme involves a yearly fee of around £400 and an assessment to see the 
defaultsame books and paperwork. I have a copy of BS7671, calibration certificate, test certification software etc 
defaultetc
default. I had it last year and will still have it next year. I believe the yearly assessment should be 3 yearly instead but for the same fee. I can’
defaultt se
defaulte where the money goes and don’t believe it is representative of the scheme running costs. I, like many of my trade believe they are pigs at the trough and don’t represent our trade for the trades sake.
default&#xa0;
defaultCertsure
default in its guise of the Electrical Safety Regis
defaultter, is using its position to pressure electrical contractors to take out unnecessary levels of membership in addition to the £440 it costs to register under the Part P arrangements. Good Electricians are being misrepresented on the Electrical Safety Regis
defaultter. I have written to my local MP, 
defaultElecsa
default and the Government about this. I changed scheme provider to NAPIT and registered for the 
defaultElectricsafe
default Register. This is has a far more even open approach to providing a central point to check registration.
default&#xa0;
defaultI woul
defaultd advocate and support a single register but not run by a body such as the 
defaultCertsure
default (NICEIC or ELECSA).  In the 10+ years they have run the Part P schemes, they have failed to enlighten the public by advertising or any other means about the use of register
defaulted contractors and electrical safety. They have taken our hard earned money and attempted to extort more using the Electrical Safety Register. 
defaultD 
defaultMcAspurn
default 
defaultPro Electrical Services
default22 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default