&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Dr Carl 
defaultEgdell
default (CYS0016)
defaultCycling in Sheffield 
defaultI am a 41 year old GP who has enjoyed cycling for many years. Mainly this has been for recreation with friends or family. I have
default also
default use
defaultd 
defaultcycling as a method of transp
defaultortation to get around Sheffield.
default  
defaultHowever I do this with the 
defaultknowledge that
default I
default must do so with a degree of risk.
default I
default accept that my journey must be shared with other road users, cars, busses and 
defaultlorries
default. Cycle lanes though they exist serve little practical purpose. 
defaultThey frequently do not join up, full of parked cars an
defaultd seem to go nowhere useful. The offer no protection to cyclists. 
default I hear of accidents when cyclists are seriously injured or killed on a regular basis. 
defaultIn my occupation I frequently encourage my patients to become more active. Cycling often is great way 
defaultfor people to gain fitness being low impact and relatively inexpensive. Plus it is environmentally friendly and eases congestion on our busy roads.  But many of my patients are put off by the dangers.
defaultA few years ago I enjoyed a holiday with my family in H
defaultolland.
default It stuck me just how many people use the bike there as a method of transportation. 
default Our 
defaultchildren aged
default 10, 5 and 2 at the time
default,
default cycled for miles on well thought out cycle lanes which actually got you somewhere. 
defaultThey were
default largely traffic free and whe
defaultn traffic was around the lanes were 
defaultseparate
default from the traffic.  Now we must load the bikes onto our car and drive somewhere first before we feel it is safe for the children to cycle. 
defaultIncreased cycling within our community would be hugely beneficial
default both i
defaultn
default health
default terms
default and 
defaultfor the
default environment. I fear for every cyclist I pass in my vehicle as they battle home against the traffic. When that cyclist is me then I must do the same. Cycle lanes in order to work must go somewhere and 
defaultoffer 
defaultprotection to their use
defaultrs. At the moment they do neither. 
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default. 
default&#xa0;
default