&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultAnoopdefault Shah (CYS0018)default&#xa0;defaultThis statement is written by me in my personal capacity.default&#xa0;defaultCycling is not safe enough and does not seem safe enough in most 
defaulttowns and cities in the UK. Even though cycling statistics imply that it is reasonably safe, most people are too afraid to cycle on the roads (British Social Attitudes Survey). The Metropolitan Police Commissioner recently said that he would not be prepare
defaultd to cycle on London's roads. Most parents would not be prepared to allow their children to cycle on the roads in the UK.
default&#xa0;
defaultPerception of safety is one of the most important barriers to increasing levels of cycling in the UK, and can only be overcome by sep
defaultarating cyclists from motor traffic. This is achieved by building cycle paths along major roads and removing through motor traffic from minor roads, with high quality street design according to the Dutch model.
default&#xa0;
defaultFor reasons of health, the economy, the envi
defaultronment and people's happiness it is essential that cycling is made safer, more convenient and more pleasant in the UK.
defaultThe Government must implement the recommendations of the All Par
defaultty Parliamentary Cycling Group, which was endorsed by parliament but not acted upon.
default&#xa0;
defaultSome of the key recommendations include 20mph speed limits on all non-trunk roads in urban areas – this is essential for the safety of pedestrians and cyclists. The trans
defaultport authority must ensure that the actual speed does not exceed this, using road features to encourage lower speed (e.g. narrow lanes, zebra crossings, speed cameras or speed tables/humps (sinusoidal profile humps across the whole width of the road are pr
defaulteferable for cycling). Current 
defaultDfT
default criteria require a minimum of three serious injuries or deaths before speed cameras can be installed – 
defaultthis
default is unacceptable; safety systems should be implemented before deaths happen in order to prevent them.
default&#xa0;
defaultCurrent roa
defaultd design paradigm is to ensure that motor traffic is not delayed, even if this results in inconvenience and danger to cyclists and pedestrians. This leads to high levels of motor vehicle use in the UK, with congestion and pollution. Bow roundabout in Londo
defaultn was designed in this way and caused the death of a number of cyclists, because the blue painted superhighway was encroached by left-turning motor vehicles. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDfT
default should update the Design Manual for Roads to ensure that high quality walking and cycling ro
defaultutes are incorporated in all new road designs. This will reduce reliance on motor cars and the amount of road space they require.
default&#xa0;
defaultI recommend that all traffic 
defaultengineers  go
default on a Dutch infrastructure study tour in order to see how the system works and lear
defaultn from the experts. 
defaultTfL
default and other transport organisations should also employ Dutch engineers to ensure that new cycling infrastructure is built correctly. For example, the recently-opened CS2 extension in London, stated by the Mayor to be a high-quality sc
defaultheme, has many faults. The only improvement on previous 'superhighways' is that it is segregated from the road by a kerb, but the junctions still have conflicts between cyclists and left-turning vehicles (which should be designed out by separate traffic li
defaultghts).
default&#xa0;
defaultAs well as better road design, there is a need for enforcement of traffic rules with a particular focus on modes of transport which cause the most injuries, i.e. motor vehicles. Sentences for motoring offences need to be reviewed to ensure that dan
defaultgerous drivers are removed from the road. Cyclists usually contravene the 
defaulthighway code
default if the infrastructure is poor, for example they may find it safer to cycle on the footway than on a dangerous road. In such situations this is a sign that the infrastruc
defaultture needs to be improved (e.g. by providing a high quality cycle path, to remove the incentive to ride on the footway), rather than reprimanding cyclists.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is essential to 
defaultsegregate cyclists from other road users, and the Dutch model of segregation should be used. This is the only way to achieve mass cycling.
default&#xa0;
defaultOn busy urban roads, separate paths are provided for cyclists, motor vehicles and pedestrians, with segregation at j
defaultunctions. This may require the relocation of car parking, removal of motor traffic lanes, 
defaultremoval
default of grass verges or narrowing of excessively wide footways. Minor roads should not be through roads for motor traffic so that cyclists can share the road with 
defaultcars. On rural roads where there are few pedestrians, cyclists and pedestrians can share the same path (which should be designed for convenient cycling, of adequate width, with good visibility and free from obstructions).
default&#xa0;
defaultEmergency measures should be 
defaulttaken along dangerous stretches of road such as the non-segregated part of Cycle Superhighway 2, where temporary barriers can be used to keep motor vehicles out of cycle lanes. Separate left turn signals are required at major intersections to protect cycli
defaultsts from left turning traffic. Dangerous 
defaultlorries
default with large blind spots should be banned from city centres at busy times.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default