&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Edward Stubbs, former Detective Sergeant, Metropolitan Policedefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultMy name is Edward Stubbs. I only recently became aware that a Parliament committee was looking into Police crimes at count figures. Some time ago a member of the Police Federation stated the 
defaultreasoner
default Police 
defaultdont
default act as Whistle blowers was because of The 
defaultLeverson
default enquiry. I don't know how much Police service this member had but Police have been 
defaultfiddlingintend
default crime figures for last 60 years long before  
defaultLeverson
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultI se
defaultrved 32 years in Metropolitan 
defaultPolice. Almost 29yrs as a 
defaultDetective most as a Detective Se
defaultrgeant.
default I
default worked at 12 different police stations including 3 years at Scotland Yard. The half mile distance from Edgware station to Church Street Market on Saturday was not paved with gold as in case of Dick Whittington. It must have been paved with wallets purses. The same with Oxford Street on late night shopping  on Thursday. In this day and  age it's mobile phones and pu
defaultr
defaultses. At both police stations would  queue at counter to report THIER property stolen. These matters were reported as THEFT FROM PERSON. When they were submitted The Detective Chief Superintendent at time said he wanted statements from all victims to prove THIER property was stolen. If they couldn't produce evidence of THEFT it was recorded as PROPERTY LOST IN THE 
defaultSTREET.as
default a result nothing was ever investigated as a crime. If by some 
defaultmiricle
default any one was arrested and admitted number of offences. The original offences were re-classified which improved the clear up rate. You then had clear ups for no crimes. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Home Secretary keeps saying reported crime figures are falling.
default 
defaultthis is down to members of the public NOT REPORTING CRIME BECAUSE THEY KNOW WANT BE INVESTIGATED. If an elderly person tries 
defaulttoo
default report a crime they 
defaultar
default greeted was WE HAVNT GOT OFFICERS AVAILABLE? CAN YOU COME TO POLICE STATION AND REPORT IT? The reason there 
defaultar
default no Police available to report crime is because they 
defaultar
default manning road blocks to report minor Road Traffic Offences which boost the figures and 
defaultdont
default need  great 
defaultdeat
default of brain power. They then spend rest time in Police station w
defaultriting traffic reports.
default&#xa0;
defaultNumerous 
defaultoffeces
default of Burglary were reduced to NO crime or CRIMINAL damage. If a suspect was arrested and admired offences these were reclassified to improve clear up rates. Every day offences known as grid offences (MORE SERIOUS crimes) were suited to 
defaultDivional
default Headquarters to be submitted to area headquarters then to Office in charge of crime to SCOTLAND yard who would then report to THE commissioner. Crimes of alleged RAPE were reduced to INDECENT assault. Police regulations stated ALL allegations or RAPE MUST be investigated by Detective Inspector. Numerous 
defaultoffencs
default of Rape were investigated by inexperienced detective due to pressure of work. This accounted for large number of not guilty verdicts.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis is outside 
defaultur
default remit but you should know how save millions of pounds from Police budget. Get rid of half departments at Scotland Yard. When the decided to promote 
defaultany one
default who had a degree in 
defaultPlastercine
default or from 
defaultlegaland
default without any knowledge of police work. They had to create departments in Scotland Yard to place all Deputy Assistant 
defaultCommissiones
default Commanders THIER Superintendent staff officers with all accompanying 
defaultstaff.they
default spent most days having meetings and issuing memos to justify THIER 
defaultexcistance
default. If private company was run like this it would go bankrupt in very little time.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default