&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultAlan White
default (CYS0022)
default&#xa0;
defaultI have been cycling regular for many years mostly in the Midlands. I do voluntary work to support cycling through 
defaultSustrans
default and the CTC. Through this work I talk to many 
defaultpeople and especially would be cyclists. I have assisted with adult cycle training. The message I hear over and over again particularly from would be cyclists is "I would not cycle on road - 
defaultits
default too dangerous". I used to spend a lot of time trying to refut
defaulte this argument, but sadly I am afraid I am beginning to believe them myself. My own perception is that cycling has become significantly less safe and consequently I am now much more selective over when and where I cycle.
defaultThe recent deaths in London are a 
defaultgreat sadness 
defaultto me, but I also feel 
defaultenormous frustration because at the strategic level the problems are well understood and the answers known. These were articulated in the Get Britain 
defaultC
defaultycling
default 
defaultR
defaulteport
default which received unanimous support in the commons.
default I
defaultQuit
defaulte simply you need segregation between a 100kg cyclist 
defaulttraveling
default at 10mph and cars and 
defaultlorries
default with a mass 20-300 times greater, perhaps 
defaulttraveling
default 3 times as fast.
defaultWhilst this situation prevails, talk about education, training, 
defaultbehaviour
default, helmets
default, headphone
defaults 
defaultetc. is just whistling in the wind. I am frustrated that the media and politicians focus on cyclist 
defaultbehaviour
default normally citing jumping of red lights. Whilst I agree this is unacceptable it p
defaultai
defaultls
default into insignificance compared with motorists who speed, pass 
defaulttoo close to cyclists and generally drive without due care and attention. Cycling in cities has become an extreme sport only to be attempted by the young confident and fit. 
defaultIt doesn't have to be like this. One only has to look overseas to Holland. Here cy
defaultcling is a normal activity carried out daily by young and old. Cyclists are not kitted out in body 
defaultarmour
default, but they do have a proper segregated infrastructure. 
defaultThe Dutch reap enormous benefits from this infrastructure by providing a viable way to travel w
defaulthich reduces congestion and make cities more 
defaultliveable
default .
default In turn this benefits the environment and the nation's health. This vision cannot be achieved overnight it requires vision, it requires leadership and it requires investment. Sadly I see none of these
default.
defaultAs I cyclist myself for more than 30 years I have witnessed cycling becoming increasingly dangerous. I now very carefully choose when and where I cycle. There are very few segregated cycle routes available to me and even these are in a poor state of repa
defaultir.
defaultThe strategic solution will not happen overnight, so I would suggest the following tactical changes
default:
default- make 20mph the default speed limit where people live;
default- equip lorries with sensors
default to cover blind spots
default- ban 
defaulthgvs
default during rush hour
default- more traffic in
defaultfringement enforcement 
default- more cyclist awareness training for motorists . 
default- 
defaultmore
default cycle training particularly for adults
defaultI must stress that these are tactical, and must not been seen as a substitute for a fit for purpose infrastructure.
defaultDo not on any accou
defaultnt make helmets compulsory or ban cycling in any way. This is not solving the problem, but admitting defeat.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default