BRC28
defaultWRITTEN EVIDENCE SUBMITTED BY NIGEL HARMANdefault0.0
default&#xa0; 
defaultINTRODUCTION
defaultThis written evidence is given in response to an invitation to comment on Part P schemes. 
defaultIt is given in 3 sections, 
defaultSUMMARY OF 
defaultRECOMMENDATIONS, OBSERVATIONS and 
defaultBIBLIOGRAPHY
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1.0
default&#xa0; 
defaultSU
defaultMMARY OF 
defaultRECOMMENDATIONS
default&#xa0;
default2
default.0
default 
defaultOBSERVATIONS
defaultI have noted your terms of reference and will address each one in turn 
defaultbelow:-
default2.1.0
default              
defaultthe extent to which members of the public are aware of the competent persons scheme and that certain domestic electrical works need to be reviewed and certified to meet the requirements of Building Regulations;
default2.1.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe “Gas Safe” and previous schemes have been around for many years and are still not universally known by the public. I am sure the public are aware of the need for safety in connection with gas appliances but checking to see if they are “Gas Safe” regist
defaultered is 
defaultstill 
defaultnot a priority for them.
default2.1.2
default              
defaultCalling a scheme a “Competent Persons Scheme” and expecting the public to become aware of it, when a lot of electrician’s are not even sure what it means, is just not going to work.
default A single “Electric Safe” register has a 
defaultmuch higher chance of successful public recognition.
default2.1.3
default              
defaultThe phrase “certain domestic electrical works” is a big part of the 
defaultproblem. 
defaultSuccessive versions of Part P hav
defaulte been 
defaulttoo complicated
default in their attempts to de
defaultfine their scope. M
defaultany electrician’s would have difficulty defining what type of electrical work is or is not notifiable and, it is a fact of life that the more complicated you make something
default the less likely it is to be 
defaultunderstood and 
defaultadhered to. Less 
defaultis o
defaultften 
defaultmore and, I believe the entire Part P document could (should) be replaced by the following single sentence:-
defaultAll default(domestic?) defaultelectrical installation work, other than “like for like” replacement of default defaultcomponentsdefault where basic electrical safety has been confirmeddefault, must  be notifieddefault to the local authority.”default2.1.4 
default              
defaultThe Committee 
defaulthas rightly 
defaultcriticized the witnesses for duplication of schemes but 
defaultit is 
defaultworth noting that the above sentence, added to the already respecte
defaultd (by electrician’s) BS7671 Requirements for Electrical Installation, would render Part P superfluous.
default It often seems the case that new policies and procedures are introduced without considering that relatively minor changes to existing documents may provi
defaultde a much simpler
default, cheaper and, more importantly, 
defaulteffective solution.
default2.1.5
default              
defaultWhilst it is accepted that certain a
defaultreas of electrical work present
default a higher risk than 
defaultothers, a fundamental error, such as reverse
defaultd
default polarity at a socket outlet, has
default the 
defaultcapacity 
defaultto cause injury wherever it is installed, not just so-called “special locations.”
default2.2default.0default              defaultthe extent to which those carrying out electrical works are adequately trained to default  defaultmeet the requirements of the Building Regulations and the extent to which all those working for a company are brought up to the same level of skills; default2.2
default.1
default              
defaultBroadly speaking, electrical installation work is currently being carried out by two “classes” of p
defaulterson, electricians and non-e
defaultlectricians.
default2.2
default.2
default              
defaultE
defaultlectricians are very well-qualified, self-motivated and, to a large extent self-monitored individuals who are trained to a high standard (some would say too high for domestic work only), who are required to achieve NVQ Level III 
defaultbefore they are fully recog
defaultniz
defaulted by the main 
defaultvoluntary 
defaultregistration bodies.
default2.2.3
default              
defaultNon-electricians, such as kitchen fitters, plumbers and heating engineers are a problem. Most will admit to you that the reason they became plumbers or whatever, rather than electricians, was because o
defaultf the very fact that they “don’t really understand electricity.” 
default2.2.4
default              
defaultElectrical work is problematic because, particularly for domestic work, the actual skill level required to run and terminate a cable is relatively low, particularly for someone with as
defaultsociated skills, like a plumber. However, it demands a much higher level of skills, knowledge and experience to ensure that any additions or alterations are car
defaultried out safely, and properly tested and commissioned. 
default2.2.5
default              
defaultI do not believe that a 5 day defi
defaultned scope Part P course will give a person the required competence level to issue them with a Part P registration card which just further legitimizes their position as modifiers of electrical circuits.
default2.2.6
default              
defaultIn short, I believe that the gap between these t
defaultwo levels of accreditation is far too wide. This is partly due to the electrical industry’s insistence on every electrician gaining a full level III qualification, leaving the wa
defaulty open for 
default“Part P”
default domestic installers who are allowed to alter circuits one at a time but not all at once! This is very reminiscent of the “trigger’s broom”
default 
defaultsketch in On
defaultly Fools and H
defaultorses!
default2.2.7
default              
defaultIn my opinion, there is an urgent need for 3 type
defaults
default of person authoriz
defaulted to ca
defaultrry out electrical work as follows:-
defaulta.
default full
default NVQ LIII q
defaultualif
defaulti
defaulted and registered
default Industrial, Commercial and Domestic
default 
default   
defaultElectrician.
defaultb.  
defaultAn NVQ LII qualified and registered Domestic Electrician
default2.3.0default              defaultthe extent to which those carrying out electrical works, to which the Building Regulations apply, review or have their work reviewed to ensure that it mdefaulteets the requirements of the Regulations;default2.3.1
default              
defaultIt is the policy
default of most of the Registration and trade bodies to carry out annual assessments of their registered or member enterprises. This usually involves the inspection of one or two installations that have been completed by the enterprise. It is my belief that, in m
defaultost cases, this level of monitoring is adequate and it is difficult to suggest other means by which this may be 
defaulteffectively carried out.
default 
default2.4.0default              defaultthe adequacy of the review of electrical works carried out by Competent Persons;default2.4.1
default              
defaultLessons should be learnt
default here from the “Gas Safe” scheme, whereby it was the enterprise that needed to be registered with no requirement for the individual to demonstrate competence. Experience has shown that, for a large number of companies, on-site assessment or monitoring of e
defaultmployees is just not practical due to commercial pressures and lack of trained assessors. This is still a fundamental flaw with NVQ qualifications and the reason large numbers of “electricians” possess only a technical certificate and not an NVQ, preventin
defaultg them from registering with bodies such as the JIB.
default2.4.2
default              
defaultI believe that a compulsory system of registration via a single body with training and certification provided by competitive suppliers allied to truly “standardized” standards would 
defaultachieve a level
default of confidence in the competence of persons carrying out electrical work.
default2
default.4
default.3
default              
defaultSuccessive governments seem to have been reluctant to implement this for the electrical industry
default but 5 year assessment of individuals need not be any 
defaultmore onerous than annual a
defaultssessment of enterprises.
default2.5.0default              defaultthe effect of competition between accreditation bodies, and the two separate registers of electricians, on the standards of review of domestic electrical work;default default2.5.1
default              
defaultIt was abundantly clear from the video of the meeting 
defaultthat entrusting a registration scheme to competing bodies is not the way forward. Each body 
defaultrelies on being slightly different from its competitors in order to secure an advantage over the other. This is not the right atmosphere in which to develop common 
defaultstandards, particularly where safety is concerned.
default2.5.2
default              
defaultI have watched with interest over many years how bodies which claim to be maintaining standards are actually responsible for distorting them or at least “muddying the waters.” Electrical test certifi
defaultcates are a case in point. BS7671 provides model forms for certification of ele
defaultctrical installations but, most bodies 
defaultand trade association
defaults have
default produced their own version of the form. This is very confusing when encouraging people to “conform to the stan
defaultdards” when the very bodies responsible for policing them encourage the use of non-standard documents.
default2
default.
default5.3
default              
defaultThe chairman was right, the only way to cut through the vested interests and enforce standardization is to impose a statutory registration body.
default2.6.0default default              defaultthe adequacy of the supervision by DCLG of the accreditation schemes. default2.6.
default1
default              
defaultI am 
defaultunaware of the procedures DCLG have
default implemented to 
defaultsupervise 
defaultthes
defaulte 
defaultschemes and am therefore unable to comment.
default 
default2.6.2
default              
defaultHowever, I do get the feeling that, in all walks of life, those who strive to get things right are being made to jump through more and more hoops to prove they are doing it right in the first place. A little more supervision and prosecution of the “offende
defaultrs” is what’s actually required – but this is difficult. 
default3.0
default 
defaultBIBLIOGRAPHY
defaultMy name is Nigel Harman and the opinions expressed above are entirely personal.
defaultI have worked in the electrical industry since 1975 as an electrical engineer, college lecturer, 
defaulttrainer and assessor of individuals and inspector of installations
default in electrical installation and renewable technologies.
defaultI am submitting this report because I believe that the electrical industry and it’s
default customers are not being well served by the plethora of qualifications and “schemes” which are simply confusing everybody and having no real impact on unauthorised or sub-standard work.
default25 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default