&#xa0;
defaultSupplementary written evidence submitted by defaultCalordefault Gas Ltd (HOT0061)default&#xa0;defaultFirstly
default,
default defaultI
default would
default like to thank the Committee for the opportunity to provide oral evidence yesterday as part of your inquiry into heat.
default&#xa0;
defaultDuring the two evidence sessions a considerable amount of attention was given to the poor operating performance of heat pumps – particul
defaultarly air source heat pumps (ASHPs) – in a number of independent field trials. We had raised this issue as part of our evidence and as such we thought the Committee might find it useful to have a more detailed summary of how poorly ASHPs have performed 
defaultacro
defaultss these trials. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe have of course raised the question as to whether ASHPs should qualify for tax payer funded subsidy given that their performance in closely monitored trials over long periods has repeatedly failed to meet the requirements of the Renewa
defaultble Energy Directive
default meaning the energy they generate could not be counted towards the UK’s renewable targets
default. This is not withstanding the claims of at least one manufacturer that 
defaultthe technology is so good it doesn’t need a subsidydefault to make it economically attractive for consumers – quoting a 17% annual return on investment in the process.
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, we have a bigger concern based around consumer protection. We have already had cause to complain to the ASA regarding the sales literatu
defaultre of one ASHP installer
default and the ASA forced the company in question to amend their literature as a result. W
defaulte
default are aware of at least one other successful ASA complaint in this area.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur understanding is that many companies have plans in place to offer free
default of charge ASHP installations along the lines of the “rent-a-roof” model that was prevalent when solar PV subsidies were launched. In the case of solar PV the householder was offered free solar panels on the basis that they would get the benefit of any “fr
defaultee” electricity produced whilst the investing company was able to claim the Feed in Tariffs (
defaultFiTs
default) for each kW of metered generation. As such it was possible to see this as a guaranteed “win-win” for each party.
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, in the case of ASHPs the picture is not so clear cut – for the householder at least. 
defaultThis is because ASHPs could be offered on a free of charge basis to households who might otherwise be able to afford the normal capital costs associated with the 
defaultinstallation of an ASHP system. This will be particularly true of households containing vulnerable people who might already be in fuel poverty. They will get a free system and the investing company will get a 
defaultguaranteed
default rate of investment return for the 7 
defaultyears that they are able to claim the RHI on the basis of the free/subsidised installation. It is important to note that the return is 
defaultguaranteed
default as RHI payments are made on a deemed rather than a metered basis.
default As such the bulk of the risk sits fairly and
default squarely with the consumer as they will have the gamble as 
defaultto whether the ASHP system will deliver what it says on the tin. Much of the evidence to date, which is detailed in the enclosed analysis, shows that the odds are not great:
defaultIt should be noted that EST Phase 2 only achieved th
defaulte higher
default level after 3 years and 
defaultafter 
defaultmajor rectification wor
defaultk being carried out
default in a large proportion  of cases
default – including completely new systems.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis represents a real and present threat
default as ASHPs which fail to perform will leave
default vulnerable consumers struggling to pay 
defaultpotentially 
defaultastronimical
default energy bills. If th
defaulte Committee wants to see the damaging impact this can have we would urge you to watch the latest 
defaultBBC1 
defaultRip Off 
defaultBritain programme which was broadcast on 17
defaultth
default September 2013 and shows the misery which is being heaped upon 
defaultvulnerable 
defaulthouseholds right across 
defaultBritain:
defaulthttp://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RlJLxMcF0V4
default&#xa0;
defaultThe scandal here is that DECC is currently sitting on the performance data for over 4200 ASHPs which it has obtained via its monitoring of the R
defaultenewable Heat Premium Payment Programme (RHPP) since August 2011. This data was to have been published over the summer, but has been deemed “too complex” to publish. 
defaultNevertheless, 
defaultwe are aware 
defaultthrough oral evidence given to the Committee on Tuesday 
defaultthat th
defaulte data is being shared with the industry who believe it is “encouraging” – not exactly a ringing endorsement.
default It might be of benefit to Members if the Committee were minded to obtain this information from Mr Davidson, because it is not available publicly n
defaultor to MPs and Peers that have asked for it.
default&#xa0;
defaultCalor
default believes that ASHPs will have a part to play in decarbonising 
defaultBritain
default’s heat demand. However, there is clear evidence that the technology is not yet ready for widespread deployment and does not provide suf
defaultficient protection for either the tax payer or end user for it to justify significant subsidy at this stage.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the meantime the Committee may want to look at and encourage more certain methods
default 
defaultof reducing carbon emissions and 
defaultlowering 
defaultpeoples’ energy bil
defaultls
default, which also offer much better value for money
default. A
default prime example of this was the Boiler 
defaultScrappage
default S
defaultcheme which operated 
defaultduring
default the second quarter of 2010. 
defaultThis provided a
default £50 million fund 
defaultthat 
defaultallowed the early replacement of 125,000 F and G rated old central heating boilers. 
defaultOver 60% of the boilers currently in peoples’ homes fall into this category of inefficient boilers. The policy 
defaultbenefitted 
defaultthe 
defaultconsumers
default who brought forward the changing of 
defaulttheir old boiler
default as they would have seen an immediate, 
defaulttypically 25% or more, reduction in their energy consumption. Moreover 
defaultthe 
defaultboiler 
defaultscrappage
default scheme gave a boost to 
defaultthe substantial 
defaultBritish 
defaultboiler 
defaultmanufacturing 
defaultindustry 
defaultand the order books of 
defaultheating
default i
defaultnstallers.
default&#xa0;
defaultCalor
default has seen the impact of th
defaultis
default polic
defaulty
default, combined with other factors (better insulation, higher energy costs, recession), on energy consumption. In the past 10 years our average central heating customer has reduced their fuel usage by over 20%
default on a weather adjusted basis. The same has happened to natural gas demand in urban areas and we believe this decline is set to continue.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhy defaultAIR SOURCE HEAT PUMPS (defaultASHPsdefault)default should not receive the RHIdefault&#xa0;defaultEXECUTIVE SUMMARYdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultCONCLUSION: defaultASHPsdefault are defaultcurrently defaulta failed technology and should be deprived of taxpayer subsidy.default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSubsidy to heat pumps is also set to surgedefault&#xa0;
defaultSubsidy is currently provided to householders who install an air source heat pump 
default(ASHP) at the rate of £850 per installation; and at a rate of £1,250 for householders who install a ground source heat pump (GSHP). Renewable Heat Incentive payments for operating these systems are scheduled for introduction in domestic premises from next 
defaultyear at an indicative rate of 6.9-11.5p/KWh for ASHPs and of 12.5-17.3p/KWh for GSHPs.
default&#xa0;
defaultLeading pdefaultump manufacturer claims subsidy unnecessarydefault&#xa0;
defaulthttp://www.ecovisionsystems.co.uk/heat-pumps/air-source-heat-pumps/Air-Source-Heat-Pumps-Without-the-RHI.html
default (Appendix 1)
default&#xa0;
defaultDimplex
default makes ASHP
defaults and according to 
defaulta
default blog
default written by its Business Development Director
default, the RHI is a waste of taxpayers’ money: “…With oil prices continuing to rise, increasingly the financial argument for upgrading to air source heat pumps actually already stands firmly 
defaulton its own two feet without the need for a motivational incentive…. actually for homeowners heating their property with oil or LPG, then the savings and benefits over their existing system should already be significantly attractive enough to make the upgra
defaultde very worthwhile anyway….Recent analysis we've carried out shows the "payback" on installing an air source heat pump in an existing property can now be as little as 6 years - and that's without taking into account any possible future RHI income or increa
defaultses in oil prices!”
default&#xa0;
defaultDimpl
defaultex
default 
defaultcalculates
default 
defaultthey can generate a 17% annual return on investment. In fact if you then add on the RHI at £500/year (DECC
default&#xa0;
defaultnumbers) the return leaps to over 27%
default.
default 
defaultDimplex
default concludes:
default 
default“It's clear then that in the right circumstances householders don't need the RHI to make installing air source heat pumps stack up”. Why then is the Treasury being so generous with taxpayer resources? 
defaultT
defaulthere are numerous 
defaultadditional 
defaultreasons
default why subsidising 
defaultA
defaultSHPs
default is very bad value for money.
default&#xa0;
defaultToo often, defaultASHPsdefault when installed fail to deliver value for moneydefault and fail to qualify as renewabledefault&#xa0;
defaultDECC is well aware 
defaultthat the performance of heat pumps is disappointing
default: “We are aware that systems installed in the past 
defaulthave not always worked as well as they should… We think it is likely that on average the results will still be a long way off the high-performing systems that are consistently being measured in Germany,” (
defaultParas
default. 199 &amp; 201, DECC Consultation on the RHI, 20.
default9.12) and again
default: “It is a common feature in field trials and assessments that there is a significant gap between expected and actual performance” (
defaultpara
default. 1.23, 
defaultMicrogeneration
default Strategy 
defaultConsultation, DECC, 22.12.10). This frank admission is echoed by the Gre
defaulten Alliance – “Heat pumps have performed badly in the UK…UK heat pumps have suffered from poor quality technology…bad installation…incorrect use…high running costs…Despite poor installations, heat pump installers aren’t being struck off for malpractice (“S
defaultwitching the UK onto heat pumps”, 29
defaultth
default May 2013)”.  
defaultThe Zero Carbon Hub identifies heat pumps as demonstrating a performance gap between stated and actual installed building performance: “There are concerns regarding the level of both installation and comm
defaultissioning skills for building services, especially mechanical ventilation and heat pumps as demonstrated by GHA research, Zero Carbon Hub’s Ventilation and Indoor Air Quality reports and EST field trial,” (
default“Closing the Gap Between Design and As-Built Perfo
defaultrmance”, 
defaultp5, May 2013).
default&#xa0;
defaultThe key to whether heat pumps deliver value for money or not is the
defaultir
default Coefficient of Per
defaultformance (
defaultCoP
default)
default. Heat pumps extract heat from the ground or air and redirect the heat for space heating and hot water. 
defaultCoPs
default represent the ratio of heat produced per unit of electricity consumed in generating that heat. A 
defaultCoP
default of 3 means that 3kWh of heat are output for 1k
defaultWh of electricity used to run the pump. Higher 
defaultCoP
default values represent relatively more efficient heat delivery. 
defaultUnder an EU Directive, h
defaulteat pumps must achieve a 
defaultCoP
default of 2.9 before their energy can contribute to the renewable energy target. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA study of install
defaulted heat pump performance published by the Energy Saving Trust on the 8
defaultth
default September 2010 – “
defaultGetting Warmer: a field trial of heat pumps”
default revealed that the actual performance of heat pumps installed in the UK was surprisingly poor. The study was financed by 
defaultthe heat pump industry and based on a sample of sites where pumps had been installed pre-selected by the industry. The pumps were installed and accredited through the 
defaultMicrogeneration
default Certification Scheme’s immediate predecessor, the Clear Skies programme. 
defaultThe study showed that only 1 of the 22 properties
default with GSHPs
default achieved th
defaulte 2.9 threshold
default, and only 9 of the 47 sites with ASHPs achieved the standard. REF commented on this report: “
defaultThe risk of premature adoption and consumer disenchantment is clearly real,
default thus raising the spectre of a 
defaultUK
default heat pump tragedy… On the basis of this study, there seems a distinct risk that some heat pumps will be subsidised even though they fail to meet the minimum standard for being considered a renewable energy source. If, on t
defaulthe other hand, government withdraws subsidies from such installations, well-meaning householders may discover after investing heavily in a heat pump that their installations fail to come up to the required EU standard, and thus forfeit entitlement to RHI p
defaultayments” (“Renewable Heat Initiative”, September 2010).
default&#xa0;
defaultA 
defaultJoseph 
defaultRowntree
default Foundation study in Elm Tree Mews in 
defaultYork
default 
defaultechoed these results:
default a communal 
defaultGSHP
default was installed with a nominal design 
defaultCoP
default efficiency of 3.2-3.5. Despite a number of interventions, thr
defaultoughout the year of monitoring the delivered 
defaultCoP
default efficiency was 2.15 – that is, it failed the renewab
defaultle
default, and would not be 
defaultgood value for the householder, nor contribute towards national renewable targets. 
defaultE
defaultxpensive technology 
defaulthad been
default installed under a false premise.
default&#xa0;
defaultA report by the Association for the Conservation of Energy, “Improving the energy efficiency of off-grid properties – the role of different heating technologies”, (March, 2011) made assumptions about the 
defaultCoPs
default of heat pump
defaults based on international data: “For GSHPs we assume a lower end 
defaultCoP
default of 2.3 and a higher end 
defaultCoP
default of
default 3.5. For ASHPs we assume  
defaultCoPs
default of 2.15 and 2.7 respectively”. On this basis all ASHPs would fail the test of being renewable since the qualifying ba
defaultr
default, and wo
defaultuld not deliver savings towards the EU targets; 
defaulta smaller number of 
defaultGSHPs would also fail.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Building Services Research and Information Association (BSRIA) is the leading independent 
defaultUK
default laboratory for testing, certification and performance verification 
defaultof a wide range of building services products. Its website discusses the pros and cons of heat pumps: “Test conditions (and hence manufacturers' quoted 
defaultCoP
default data) can therefore differ significantly from actual design and operating conditions”. This confirms
default the essential point that it is not enough to accept pre-installation manufacturers’ quoted 
defaultCoP
default data. BSRIA avert to manufacturers claiming impressive 
defaultCoPs
default but say BSRIA, “This data should be treated with caution”. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Energy Savings Trust has now publis
defaulthed Phase 2 of its testing on pumps (“The Heat is On”, May 2013). The bulk of this work involved a series of interventions on 32 of the failing Phase 1 sites over a three year period. In 12 cases the “interventions were “major”. In 10 cases, the interventi
defaultons involved the complete replacement of the pump systems. Even with all this no doubt expensive intervention: “Some sites did not improve, even with major and medium interventions”. The deficiency in performance was especially marked for ASHPs with 6 out 
defaultof 15 still failing to make the renewable grade. From this we deduce that there is no case for continued taxpayer subsidy to ASHPs since even after extensive and costly intervention by experts an unacceptable proportion could not be made to work properly. 
defaultThey would be ruled out as renewable by the EU and energy they generate would not count towards the 
defaultUK
default’s renewable targets. The average performance of ASHPs was under the bar of being counted as renewable.
default&#xa0;
defaultTo be fair, after all this desperate effort over 
defaultthree years, most GSHPs did work properly. How much all this extensive and expensive remediation would cost, and who would bear that cost – the installer or the householder – is a question for bitter experience in the market, but we draw a strong conclusio
defaultn from this that type-rating technology to a standard is a long way from actual installed performance. Let the buyer beware – and let the taxpayer beware of pouring subsidy into a technology that does not make the grade. Government should pay out subsidy o
defaultnly on those pumps tested as having delivered to minimum performance standards after installation. Time after time heat pumps simply do not do what is says on the tin.
defaultDuring cold weather heat pumps perform unacceptablydefault&#xa0;
defaultThe BSRIA website 
defaultemphasises that
default heat pumps can struggle at the coldest times of year, and their 
defaultCoPs
default can fall below the acceptable: “The relevant test standard for most packaged heat pumps is 
defaultBS EN 14511
default. For an air-to-water heat pump the standard specifies test conditions of 7
defaulto
defaultC outdoo
defaultr air temperature (source temperature). At external air temperatures lower than this, the COP will fall, as will the heating output of the heat pump. Depending on the application this reduction may be 
defaultsignificant,
default such as during a cold winter morning when 
defaultbuilding pre-heat is needed”.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn 
defaultEngland
default the average daily temperature is below 7°C in January and February; in 
defaultScotland
default, the average daily temperature is below 7°C in December, January, February and March. 
defaultIndeed, the mean temperature for the year in 
defaultSco
defaulttland
default is 6.5
default°C. 
defaultThe risk is, then, that for substantial parts of the year, varying by location heat pumps will struggle to deliver heat when it is cold outside.
default I
defaultt should come as no surprise that ASHPs should not prove so efficient when installed in the 
defaultUK
default as their comparative systems in warmer continental countries.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe carbon footprint of pumps is higher than for gaseous fuels used in heatingdefault&#xa0;
defaultNote that even with 
defaultCoPs
default of 2.9 the carbon footprint of heat pumps will be higher than the fossil fuel, natural 
defaultgas. 
defaultJohnson
default  in 
defaultEnergy Policy
default,
default 2011, vol. 39, issue 3, pages 1369-1381 finds that at UK efficiencies heat-pump footprints (in kg CO2e emitted per kWh delivered) are comparable or higher than footprints of gaseous fuels used in heating. Compared with fossil fuel gas they don’t save carb
defaulton 
defaultso the 
defaultUK
default taxpayer is paying to incentivise the expensive installation of a technology that is more polluting than a widely used fossil fuel
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultWide deployment of heat pumps would put a very expensive strain on the grid networkdefault&#xa0;
defaultThe Revised NPS (Oct. 201
default0) revealed the full implications of a pure electricity play including the electrification of heat: “Generation capacity will need 
defaultat least to doubledefault to meet this demand and, if a significant proportion of our electricity is supplied from intermittent sour
defaultces, such as wind, solar, or tidal, then the total installed capacity might need to 
defaulttriple”default (para.1.66). This is a major driving factor behind the rising cost of energy to householders.
default&#xa0;
defaultDECC fingers heat pumps as a culprit
default: “In the case of heat pumps the 
defaultchallenge to be managed is in the form of significant new electricity demand. Relative to a conventional household, installation of a heat pump could mean a doubling of annual electricity demand. Given heat demand coincides with peak electricity 
defaultdemand, th
defaultis is likely to put additional load on the network when it is most strained. Clearly, roll out of heat pumps at scale will have significant impacts on our electricity network, (
defaultMicrogeneration
default Strategy Consultation Briefing, 23
defaultrd
default December 2010)
default”.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis is 
defaulta major driving factor behind the rising cost of energy to householders. The cost of this extra generating capacity is conservatively put at £200bn – Peter Atherton of 
defaultLiberum
default Capital has assessed the infrastructure costs as being £376bn by 2030.
default&#xa0;
default“Network
default costs of a high heat pump deployment scenario are estimated to be £290 per heat pump on a GB-wide basis in 2030 (£390 in 2050). This compares to £1,130 per heat pump in rural areas in 2030 (£1,490 by 2050) (“Assessing the Impact of Large-Scale Deployment 
defaultof Heat Pumps on Electricity Distribution Network Costs”, by Ernst and Young, 2013). These large extra costs will fall on the already hard-pressed consumer.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe media are aware of heat pumps’ problemsdefault&#xa0;
defaultA TV programme, “Rip Off Britain” (BBC1, 10
default.9.2012
default) on the performance of exhaust ASHPs as installed 
default reported on r
defaultesidents from “across the estate” at the 160 acre affordable housing development at Love’s Farm in Cambridgeshire 
defaultwho 
defaultfound they were “
defaultwere being hit with huge energy bills… Instead of saving
default them money the heating system was actually costing them a lot more.” 69 houses at the 
defaultCastlefields
default Estate in Runcorn are having their ASHPs ripped out and replaced with standard gas-fired 
defaultcombi
default-boilers for similar reasons. One resident “was told her elect
defaultricity bill would cost around £320 a year but in fact her bills added up to £1200”. 15,000 of these 
defaultexhaust 
defaultASHPs had been installed in the 
defaultUK
default and the programme reported: “We’ve heard from desperate residents on estates up and down the 
defaultUK
default who’ve told us th
defaultat their eco-friendly heating has done the opposite of what they’d hope and pushed their bills up instead of down”.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThe programme returned to the issue on 17
defaultth
default September 2013 reporting on cases that had “rumbled on for years without anybody ever being a
defaultble to sort them out” with “homeowners across dozens of estates” and where “the same system has been fitted into thousands of homes across the country” and electricity bills turning out to be “fo
defaultu
defaultr times more than you were expecting”. As similar problems e
defaultmerge with subsidised pumps being widely installed across the country with achieved performances not coming up to the manufacturers’ claims who will be held responsible, and who will pick up the bill for remediation?
default 
defaultAPPENDIX 1default&#xa0;defaultAir Source Heat Pumps Mak
defaulte Sense Without The RHI – 
defaultBy Chris Davis – Business Development Director for 
defaultDimplex
default 
defaultRenewables
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default