&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidencedefault fromdefault defaultFreddefaultdie defaultTalbergdefault CEO of PIE Mapping’ (CYC0026)defaultExecutive SummarydefaultPIE mapping have been running successful
defaultly
default a HGV complaint routing service in partnership with London Councils that gives hauliers routes to follow
default, 
defaultwhich is 
defaultwell 
defaultreceived by the industry, both domestic
defaultally
default and with a growing number of international operators.  
defaultPIE also developed for
default the Olympics 
defaulta Freight Journey Planner used by TFL (still in legacy) that has the capability to impose road segment restrictions by time of day.  This was used effectively by the freight industry during the Games.
defaultAs such intelligent use and sharing of the road is in o
defaultperation for the Lorry Control Scheme and is proof that it is possible to add further time and day dependent restrictions that the industry can manage around.  
defaultShould good quality cycle data by; location and time of day
default for a
default 
defaultcycle safety restriction, 
defaultplu
defaults any key 
default‘left turn’
default sites that are more dangerous to use at certain times 
defaultbe available. 
defaultThis data can be included into a 
defaultviable safer freight routing scheme.  This will be a more practical app
defaultroach than an area wide HGV ban and more effective as we learn
default more about how best to de-conflict HGV’s and cyclists. 
defaultOther recommendations that would be
default effective and
default easier to implement 
defaultthat will have 
defaulta big impact is to enforce construction projects to ensure contractor vehicles meet time of day and location routi
defaultng criteria.  
defaultAs such we have working proof that with good data we can set up a service for compliant HGV routes.  This will enable us to share our limited road space capacity more securely and still operate the city effectively.
default&#xa0;
defaultAdefault&#xa0;defaultbrief introduction abodefaultut yourself/your organisation and your reason for submitting evidence.defaultI
default (Freddie Talberg) 
default live in London with a young family and 
defaultI 
defaultcycle and well as motorbike
default (having passed a test) commute into central London so have firsthand experience from road user 
defaultprospective. 
default  I have 
defaulta 
defaultprofessional experience in making maps for the different driver communities in London from; motorcyclist, disabled (blue badge) driver as well as LCV (vans) and the HGV driving community.
defaultMy organisation PIE Mapping started 
defaultby creat
defaulting
default mapping guides for the various driving communities into London and 
defaulthas
default developed to 
defaultmore
default complex and sophisticated transport mapping and information services.  We delivered for TFL the comprehensive Freight Journey Planner (FJP) that was used in the Ol
defaultympic Games and is currently still being used in legacy.  We also created Journey Planning services for LOCOG during the Games that included navigating VIPs, Athletes, media etc across London.
defaultPIE Mapping is 
defaulta SME
default business that has used 
defaultentrepreneurial
default innovation to work with London Councils to create a real first in navigating HGV’s across London in compliance to the London Lorry Con
defaultt
defaultrol Scheme (LLCS).  We have created the first compliant routing service for HGV’s that provides routes to hauliers/drive
defaultrs that ensure
defaults
default the correct routing for their vehicle
default’s
default to the roads and with compliance 
defaultto
default the LLCS scheme.  This ensures no penalties 
defaultare
default imposed,  for use of inappropriate roads.  We currently have over 330 paying hauliers with a 100% compliance and a z
defaultero PCN issue for our clients.  Customers include operators like; Superdrug, Wincanton
default and Hanson
default. 
defaultThe number of international haulier that sign up for our service is growing and the feedback we get from them is 
defaultpositive as 
defaultthey love that 
defaultthere 
defaultis a servi
defaultce th
defaultat provides an creditable routing 
defaultto navigate a HGV in London.  
defaultWe digitise 
defaultplanned events such as the recent Lords Mayors Show, Remembrance Parade road closures etc.  
defaultAs such we
default automatically regenerate routes if any of these planned events 
defaultaffect
default t
defaultheir normal routes 
defaultthis 
defaultensure
defaults
default 
defaultOperators a
defaultlways have a compliant route
default by day and time
default.
defaultThe recent development 
defaultis the ability to download a route 
defaultto sat nav.  This enables drivers to be se
defaultnt a route to follow on their sat nav making it easier for drivers 
defaultto follow the complaint and appropriate route
defaultWe are submitting evidence to prove that London has already a great working model for an HGV routing service that serves compliant routes which we have made easy enough that the drivers simply follow.  The feed
defaultback is that the driver
defaults
default love it and they are h
defaultappy to be compliant and advised 
defaulton their rout
defaultes through London
default.  
defaultPlus du
defaultring the Olympic G
defaultames the FJP (Freight Journey Planner) we created was able to restrict certain parts of the road network on a time of
default day basis.  i.e. road closures for a couple hours
default, even with 
defaulttwo 
defaultshort
default time
default window
defaults of
default closure
defaults
default in the same day
default.  This is reflective of the cycle community commuter morning and afternoon peaks. These are complex time closures which the FJP has incorporate
defaultd.  Each freight operator was able to use the tool/service to create their time of day routes.  We routed journey
defaults
default around the restrictions or if impossible suggested a new start time for their journey. 
defaultAny factual information you have to offer from which defaultthe committee might be able to draw conclusions, or which could be put to other witnesses for their reactions.defaultThe conclusion I draw from this is that London has already some great working models to implement compliant routing that could include location a
defaultnd time specific restrictions around the cycle network.  Our London Lorry Route Approver (
defaultwww.londonlorrycontrol.com
default) could be configured to include these restrictions as could the TFL FJP.  
defaultPlease also note that a 
defaulthigh risk 
defaultof accident
defaults
default happen at left turns,  these 
defaultcan 
defaultbe 
defaultadd
defaulted as 
defaultleft turn restrictions on smaller roads and on a time of 
defaultday basi
defaults easily for HGV routing to be routed accordingly.
default 
defaultThe beauty of this approach is the ability to c
defaultreate time and location restrictions for cycle safety.  
defaultThe key for a viable city and road share model is good data to determine what times and locations we can de-conflict. 
defaultThe locations will need to be dynamic as TfL &amp; other
defaults will need to 
defaultget a handle on
default cycle 
defaultbehaviour 
defaultdata and which locations and times we need to protect from HGV’s .  This approach can provide a safer freight routing requirement.  i.e. hauliers have to sign up for the safer freight scheme which could be 
defaulta 
defaultvolunteer 
defaultservice 
defaultinitially bas
defaulted on their TFL FORS membership (Fleet Operators Recognition Scheme).
default  Alternatively this could be a compulsory requirement for construction project sites.
defaultPIE with City University have been researching (own time) the data that is readily available that wi
defaultll enable us to create a good understand of the cycle behaviour model.  This
default would include 
defaultwhich roads/routes/areas by time of day and day of the week do we ne
defaulted to identify.  Our research found good contacts in TFL plus sites like thi
defaults:
default&#xa0;
defaulthttp://casa.oobrien.com/traffic/
default , 
defaultTfL
default have volumetric data 
defaulton 
default 
defaulthttp://w
defaultww.wocref.org/CRI-Volume_2_files/Gordon,Parkin-Patterns_of_Use_by_Season,_Day_of_Week_and_Time_of_Day_Leading_to_Route_Typologies.pdf
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultAny recommendations for action by the Government or others which you would like the committee to consider.defaultMy 
defaultrecommendations would be to change the current LLCS
default (London Lorry Control Scheme)
default to be day time routing also instead of just night-t
defaultime or change the network restrictions for day time.  (technically we can handle the restrictions data and provide the comp
defaultliant routes by time and day).
defaultOther recommendations that will be easier and quick to implement that can work would be to enforce all construction sites/projects to have a complaint routing service for HGV contractors vehicles that includes time and 
defaultlocation restrictions on the cycle network.  Therefore ensuring construction vehicles are not on these roads at the key times and locations as cyclist
default based on a good cyclist data model
default.  
defaultI recommend that the restriction areas are set up so they can be ch
defaultanged as we will need flexibility to 
defaultassign key locations as we better understand the vulnerable areas and behaviours.   
defaultWe need more data on which locations that is best for HGVs to avoid and at what times and days of the week so the system really works. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default