&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultRoad Safety Analysis (CYS0028)
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultTransport Select Committee session on Cycling Safety
default, 2 December 2013
defaultThe ongoing public 
defaultdialogue
default 
defaultaround cyclist safety has generated more heat than light. Much discussion of the topic seems to reflect a 
default“
defaultTwo Tribes
default”
default mentality: many drivers and cyclists alike perceive themselves as blamed and bullied, and in response have a
defaultdopted an entrenched approach to the 
defaultdebate. At the heart of this dichotomy lies both sides’ convictions that cyclist injuries are mainly ‘the 
defaultother guy’s fault’: many cyclists feel that drivers treat them with reckless contempt; many drivers have countles
defaults tales of cyclists who ignore the rules of the road; both sides are quick to accuse the other of aggressive and irresponsible behaviour. This febrile atmosphere has only increased with the recent tragic spate of cyclist deaths.
defaultThe present climate of the 
defaultcycling safety debate present
defaults
default government with significant political challenges. 
defaultM
defaultany 
defaultproposed 
defaultintervention
defaults
default 
defaultintended 
defaultto improve cycling safety 
defaultcould 
defaultbe perceived by one or both sides of the debate as 
defaultan accusation of 
defaultblame 
defaultagainst them
default. The consequent 
defaultvit
defaultriolic 
defaultattack
defaults
default will 
defaultonly 
defaultserve to 
defaultmake 
defaultconsensus and acceptance 
defaulteven 
defaulthard
defaulter
default to achieve
default. 
defaultGiven that any 
defaultgovernment action 
defaultis likely to include 
defaulta range of measures which need to win 
defaultbroad 
defaultacceptance 
defaultin order 
defaultto be effective, 
defaulta stormy reception of this kind 
defaulti
defaults likely to 
defaultweaken their long term effect on 
defaultcasualty reduction
default.
default 
defaultA
defaultn intelligence led approach based on objective information
default is 
defaultprerequisite for 
defaultquenching 
defaultthese flames. 
defaultThis submission provides fact based information 
defaultwhich intends to elucidate the extent to which the actions of 
defaultvarious 
defaultroad users influence 
defaultinjury crashes. It is indicative of a direction of travel 
defaultwhich this 
defaultdebate 
defaultmay take 
defaultin 
defaultthe 
defaultfuture. If all concerned parties are informed by home truths about what i
defaults actually occurring on Britain’s roads, it may become easier for government, road safety stakeholders and mainstream public opinion to coalesce around an agenda for effective future action.
defaultRoad Safety Analysis (RSA) is a not-for-profit company which prov
defaultides quality analytical and educational products and services, notably the award-winning web-based analysis tool MAST Online, to the British road safety profession.  
defaultIn order to elucidate the impact of both driver and cyclist behaviour on 
defaultroad 
defaultrisk, 
defaultRSA 
defaultha
defaults sought to examine the factors which contribute to 
defaultincidents which resulted in injury and involved
default 
defaultboth 
defaultmotor vehicles and pedal cycles
default. 
defaultIt is hoped that this 
defaultevidence 
defaultwill shed some light on the heated ‘blame game’ which sometimes breaks out between grou
defaultps representing road users, leading to an increased sense of joint responsibility for use of shared space and mutual respect for the dangers and difficulties faced by others.
defaultThis information is derived from 
defaultSTATS19 data supplied by the Departm
defaultent for Transport to 
defaultRSA 
defaultfor dissemination to the road safety community via inclusion in MAST Online. This data includes 
defaultcontributory factors recorded under STATS19
default,
default which are not available to the 
defaultgeneral 
defaultpublic for data protection reasons but are 
defaultincluded
default in an anonymised summary configuration 
defaultin MAST
default,
default 
defaultwith access restricted to 
defaultpublic sector road safety professionals
default only
default.
defaultThis evidence deliberately includes all qualifying police attended incidents, even where the actual degree of injury inflicted was not 
defaultparticularly severe. About five-sixths of the casualties in these incidents were recorded as ‘Slight’; this classification includes injuries such as whiplash, shallow cuts, sprains, bruising and shock requiring roadside attention. This choice was made for 
defaultseveral reasons:
defaultUp to six contributory factors (CFs) can be recorded by a police officer who attended the scene of an injury crash
default, each related to a participant (vehicle, driver, rider, passenger or uninjured pedestrian). 
defaultIt is important to a
defaultppreciate that 
defaultCFs reflect the officer's opinion at time of reporting 
defaultand 
defaultmay not be the result of extensive investigation
default. Therefore, they 
defaultshould be regarded 
defaultonly 
defaultas a general guide
default to the factors most likely to feature in incidents, rather than a definit
defaultive explanation for them. However, in the last seven years attending officers have recorded CFs for 
defaultover nine hundred thousand
default injury crashes, making them by far the most extensive and inclusive basis for examining 
defaultthe issues which 
defaulttypically 
defaultprecipitate
default sy
defaultstem failure 
defaultand 
defaultresult in injury.
defaultThis preliminary examination included 
defaultCF
defaults
default recorded by 
defaultall 
defaultpolice officers who attended injury crashes on Britain’s roads 
defaultover 
defaultthe last seven years (2006 to 2012) which involved 
defaulttwo vehicles, one of which was 
defaulta pedal cycle
default and 
defaultthe other 
defaulteither 
defaulta 
defaultcar or 
defaulta 
defaultgoods vehicle
default. 
defaultThis sample included 67
default,
default88
default2
default police attended crashes, 
defaultencompassing 
defaulta total of 135,764 individual
defaultly attributed 
defaultCFs
default.
defaultTh
defaulte
default analysis divides 
defaultCFs 
defaultinto two broad categories:
defaultCFs which were attributed directly to a driver or rider were then grouped by vehicle type:
default61,792 
defaulttwo vehicle injury crashes involving a pedal cycle and a car
default were analysed. 
defaultThe overall proportion of cyclist injuries to other road users 
defaultin these incidents is a stark warning of the vulnerability of cyclists in the event of conflict with a motor vehicle. 
defaultThese crashes resulted in 63,305 casualties
default,
default of whom 97% were cyclists. 17% of 
defaultthese 
defaultcasualties were either killed or seriously injured
default, o
defaultf whom 
default98% were cyclists.
default 369 people were killed in these crashes: all 
defaultbar 
defaultone 
defaultwere 
defaultcyclist
defaults
default.
defaultFigure 1 (see appendix) 
defaultincludes all these 
defaultcrashes
default, grouped 
defaultdepending on 
defaultthe category of 
defaultCFs reported by the attending officer: those attributed to the driver
default (or
defaultange circle)
default; those attributed to the cyclist
default (blue circle)
default; and those classified as environmental factors which may fall beyond the control of either
default (green circle)
default.
default An incident could fall into more than one category, with over two thousand crashes falling into all three.
defaultThe following conclusions can be drawn:
defaultSimilar analyses were conducted on 4,393 crashes 
defaultinvolving a 
defaultcyclist 
defaultand a 
defaultvan, and 1,697 crashes involving a cyclist 
defaultand a 
defaultlorry. The res
defaultulting casualties 
defaultare indicative of even greater risk
default of severe cyclist injury
default: 
defaultin crashes with vans killed and seriously injured cyclists accounted for 19% of all casualties, while in crashes with lorries 38% of casualties were killed and seriously injure
defaultd cyclists. 
default151 cyclists were killed in crashes involving lorries, almost 9% of all casualties from these incidents; while 52 cyclists were k
defaultilled in collision with vans.
defaultFigure 2 (see appendix) 
defaultshow
defaults
default 
defaultcrashes involving cyclists and lorries, grouped dependi
defaultng on the category of CFs reported by the attending officer: those attributed to the lorry driver (
defaultyellow 
defaultcircle); those attributed to the cyclist (blue circle); and those classified as environmental factors which may fall beyond the control of either (gre
defaulten circle).
default Figure 3
default 
defaultshows crashes involving cyclists and vans, grouped on 
defaultreported 
defaultCF categories: those attributed to the van driver (grey circle); those attributed to the cyclist (blue circle); and those classified as environmental factors (green circle)
default.
defaultThe following conclusions can be drawn:
defaultWhile there is a great deal more to explore, these brief findings make is abundantly clear that 
defaultany strategy 
defaultmust take defaultaccount of the role played by human behaviourdefault 
defaultif it seeks to address the principal factors 
defaultinvolved in cyclist safety
default. While there is no single simple explanation for why crashes involving pedal cycles occur, the evidence 
defaultprovides clear signposts which poi
defaultnt the way 
defaultfor 
defaultboth 
defaultfuture debate and ultimate action.
defaultThe most important points are:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default Edmund King, President of The AA, Autumn 2012 
defaulthttp://autumn2012.theaamagazine.com/edmund-king.php
default