&#xa0;
defaultAFS0009default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Martin Matthews, National Leader of Governancedefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSummarydefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultOverviewdefault&#xa0;defaultI was designated as a National Leader of Governance by the National College
default for teaching and Leadership
default in April 2012 having served as a Greater Manchester Governor Champion 
default2009-11
default. In the next few years I will have served more years as a governor (cumulatively) than I have been alive. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultThere are consistent and continuing concerns expressed in many schools regarding issues in the academy programme, particularly academy chains. Governors remain unconvinced of the value of academisation to many primary schools. Governors are the decision makers in this situation unless it is a forced conversion due to underperformance. The heart of the concern is what benefit the child in the classroom would gain from their school becoming an academy. 
defaultI have no comment on this aspect.
defaultThe position where a school is being compelled to become an academy should never be reached. The Local Authority (LA) should be clear well in advance of what measures are required to prevent children’s education deteriorating to this point. The deterioration will have been observed year on year and LA’s should be taking prompt action. There is a significant reluctance in some LA’s to impose Interim Executive Boards (IEB
default’s
default) to replace failing governing bodies. This issue should be tackled quickly and LA’s encouraged to 
defaultuse their powers sooner. This should be part of an overall graduated response. If LA’s are seen to be not using these powers the DfE should remove them.
defaultThere are academy chains rapidly becoming “too big to fail”
default,
default this position is avoidable.
default A 
defaultmaximum number of students/schools per academy chain
default should be set
default. Larger chains should be broken up.
defaultLA’s should imaginatively execute their monitoring functions. Monitoring functions should equally apply to all categories of school. Reporting to the DfE should be
default standardised,
default transparent and prompt.
defaultThe role of academy chains in the education landscape will continue to develop. There are a number of factors 
defaultwhich give cause for concern.
defaultAcademy status remains an unconvincing option for 
defaultcirca 
default16,000 of the 
defaultcirca 
default17,000 primary schools in England. Special factors which apply to primary schools are numerous. 
defaultFactors include:
defaultAlternatives to academisation are rarely explored. The variety of options is much wider than academy or maintained school. Options include:
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default