BRC29
defaultWritten Evidence Submitted by David Hodson (Senior)default&#xa0;defaultI have the online recording of the House of Commons Communities and
defaultLocal Government hearing on building regulations applying to electrical installations
defaultand repairs in dwellings, that was held on 2nd 
defaultSeptember, and am writing to
defaultcomment.
default&#xa0;
defaultI am 64 years old and am currently working as a self employed electrician. I 
defaultserved my electrical/electronics apprenticeship in the Royal Corps of Signals
defaultand have had a career in electronics ever since.
default&#xa0;
defaultI semi reti
defaultred in January 2010 but decided that I needed to carry on working until
defaultat least I was 65. My chosen path was as an electrician. It turned out to be quite
defaultan ordeal having to go back to college (albeit by correspondence
default) and having to learn
defaultall the regulat
defaultions that go with working with electricity.
default&#xa0;
defaultHaving succeeded in gaining the relevant
default qualifications
default by September 2010, I had
defaultthen to join a 'competent
default persons' scheme' in order to work on 'notifiable' 
defaultinstallations. But which one? This was a question a
defaultsked by one of the select 
defaultcommittee members and none of the four in the 'dock' seemed to be able to 
defaultgive a straight answer.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs an outsider and very ignorant of the industry, I chose NAPIT. It could well have
defaultbeen any other but their fees seemed to be mi
defaultd-range.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe choice should not have been there. There should be only one scheme that 
defaultpromotes the raising of standards by those working in the industry at the same
defaulttime raising the general awareness of the public and one 'flag' under which we all sail.
default&#xa0;
defaultI get most of my work by advertising in the local press. I do subscribe to other marketing
defaultwebsites (both of which were mentioned in committee) but these bring in very little work.
defaultSo I always ask my customers why they chose my ad over the others and it's 
defaultusually
defaultbecause it stands out. Nothing to do with part P, NAPIT or NICEIC. The public just
defaultdo not know. They all know about CORGI though and GasSafe.
default&#xa0;
defaultI don't really care what the flag is. Electric Safe or Electrical Safety. But there should only
defaultbe one.
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease bang their heads together and make them work together, although I think they 
defaultwill try to put as many obstacles
default in the way as possible.
default&#xa0;
defaultA very easy solution is to put the control into the Local Authority Building Control, just 
defaultas we have done for 
defaultpersonal licences in the liquor trade, and issue a similar licence to
defaultoperate. No licence, no work.
default&#xa0;
default25 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default