&#xa0;
defaultMy submission comprises many opinions and observations 
defaultthat I have accumulated over a period of some twenty years as a Cycling Advocate, based on my own experiences and ideas:
default
default The effect on Riding Styles by the types of Bicycle employed.
default
default 
defaultThe attitudes and competence of Highways Staff in dealing with Cyclin
defaultg Infrastructure matters.
default
default 
defaultPossible effects of legislation not directly affecting Cycling and Cyclists.
default
default 
defaultPerceived Police attitudes to enforcement of Traffic Law.
default
default 
defaultHGVs and Superhighways.
default
default I have also appended an e-mail Letter to a member of local High
defaultways Staff, which helps to illustrate many of the points in my main submission, particularly the difficulty in dealing with Engineers who have never undergone training in Cycling Infrastructure Principles.
default&#xa0;defaultWe would like to hear views on:default
default
defaultWhether cycling 
defaultis safe, particularly in Towns and Cities
defaultIt is my view that Cycling in 
defaultUK
default is not as safe as it could be, for the following reasons:
default1) Essentially, Cycling in 
defaultUK
default is regarded culturally as a young person’s pursuit.  It is not considered an activity that co
defaultuld be followed throughout most of life.  Anyone who rides in later life, using the Bike as a viable alternative means of Transport, is deemed to be a ‘peasant’ or eccentric in some way.  Consequently, Riders are not afforded the respect to which they are 
defaultentitled on the public roads.
default2) The situation outlined above is compounded by the types of Bicycles generally available in 
defaultUK
default.  These tend to comprise the ubiquitous ‘Mountain Bike’ or ‘Hybrid’ derivatives, which are poorly-equipped and not user-friendly.
default  The lightweight ‘bare-bones’ machines used by many younger riders can engender an aggressive riding-style that I suspect contributes to many of the problems currently manifest.  In City situations, Riders are often seen in heavy traffic without lights (a
default legal requirement) and without reflective apparel. 
defaultCompare this with the fully-equipped user-friendly Bicycles commonly used in The Netherlands and other neighbouring European Countries.  Because the Chain and gears are enclosed, these Bikes can accommod
defaultate ‘normal’ attire without fear of soiling, and for Ladies with longer skirts or overcoats, a coat/skirt guard is included.  There are fitted lights — so there is no temptation to travel without them after dark — and enclosed brakes.  Reflective 
defaulttyrewalls
default (compulsory in The 
defaultNetherlands
default &amp; some other Countries) enhance visibility in busy City streets.
defaultThe more upright riding position positively discourages aggressive riding, although the Bikes can nip along smartly if necessary.  It is also easier for the Ri
defaultder to see and be seen.
default(From my own experience, I can vouch for the low-maintenance qualities of machines of this sort; they even keep themselves relatively clean.  Moreover, the apparent success of the Inner London Barclay’s Hire Bike scheme would seem t
defaulto support my argument that, once they have been given the opportunity to sample a Bike of this kind, Riders are happy to accept it.)
default3) In many Continental Countries, there is perceived to be a greater awareness of Cyclists.  One reason could be the ‘presu
defaultmption of blame/liability’ traffic laws in some locations.   
default4) Much of the supposed ‘Cycle Facility’ infrastructure is counter-productive and thoroughly useless.  The notorious Bow Flyover Roundabout in 
defaultEast London
default is a good example.
default&#xa0;
default
default
defaultWhat central and 
defaultlocal Government could do to improve cycling 
defaultsafety.
default Ideas could include better training and advice for Drivers and Cyclists, better enforcement of the law applying to Drivers and Cyclists, and better vehicle and road infrastructure.
defaultI have certain views a
defaults to how this could be addressed:
default1) After some twenty years of Cycle Advocacy and accredited representation of Cyclist’s interests, it has long been my contention that the great majority of local (and regional) Authority Engineers, Transport Planners and 
defaultConsultants have insufficient training or expertise in the design and implementation of Cycling Infrastructure; instead all they are doing is ‘floundering around’ and making things up as they go along.  As a consummate example, I cite the Bow Flyover Round
defaultabout again — which featured a fundamental blunder in running a ‘Superhighway’ Lane across the exit from the Roundabout, despite warnings of the likely consequences.
defaultTo reinforce my concern, in April 2011, I participated in a Conference at 
defaultSouth
default 
defaultBank
default 
defaultUnive
defaultrsity
default: “Policies and Practice for Promoting Pedalling.”  When I took the opportunity to raise the aforementioned points, the Organisers empathised — to the extent that they had staged a series of Workshops to address the problems encountered, but were obli
defaultged to discontinue them through lack of interest!
defaultOne reason could be the supercilious attitude that Staff 
defaulttend
default to adopt, which I would characterise as: 
default“this is our Department; we know best . . . we don’t need anyone else interfering on (what they regard defaultas) ‘our patch!’” default In other words, once they are qualified as Highway Engineers etc. they think that there is nothing more for them to learn.
defaultBy way of an instance, an Advisory Lane of only 1.2m width was recently instated, placed immediately alongside par
defaultked Cars, on A1112 
defaultRainham
default Road in Barking &amp; Dagenham Borough.  I understand that the work was funded by Transport for 
defaultLondon
default as part of London 2012 Olympic works, intended to enhance safety on a route to an Athletes’ Training Ground!  I am sure that Membe
defaultrs would agree that it is anything but a ‘safe’ route, with Riders being channelled into (what has become known as) the ‘Door Zone.’  Furthermore, if a Cyclist wisely rides outside the Lane, he or she is likely to be subjected to abuse from Motor Drivers.
default(Within a few days, an image should be available here: 
defaultwww.london21.org/uploads/A1112_Advisory_Lane_obscured.jpg
default) .
default2) As well as the aforementioned
default 
defaultpresumption of blame/liability, another initiative that I believe would have radical effect on Driver attitude and behaviour would be (what we call) ‘graduated’ Driver Licensing whereby, for those wishing to obtain a Driver Licence, it would be necessary f
defaultirst to obtain Cycle Proficiency — by means of an advanced adult-oriented practical examination — before obtaining a provisional Motorcycle Licence, then passing a powered two-wheeler Test before gaining a provisional private Car Licence.  
defaultAt a stroke, as
default well as ensuring that prospective Drivers would be obliged to at least 
defaultsample
default Cycling, this would:
default• Guarantee that all road users could experience what it was like to be vulnerable.  
default• In turn, very likely produce better, more empathetic Drivers all rou
defaultnd.  
default• Ensure, for the most part, that every potential Driver would own a Bicycle.
default• Address the question of better Training for Cycle-users.
defaultMoreover, for some journeys, many would find that modes of transport other than the private Car were preferable. 
default There would, of course, be scope for exceptions, i.e. for those suffering disabilities or having achieved advanced years.  Historically, economic circumstances tended to take care of this for a large proportion of the travelling public, i.e. it would not 
defaulthave been feasible for most working folk to buy a motor vehicle before many years of employment and saving.  
default3) Certainly, better enforcement of existing traffic laws would be advantageous, but Police attitudes are highly suspect.  Some years ago, I suffe
defaultred a collision with a Motor Vehicle in what, I am resolute, was a clear-cut case of careless — if not borderline dangerous — driving.  My Bicycle was struck ‘amidships’ by a Minicab emerging from a side road intersection.  In the common parlance, I was ‘T
default-boned:’ my left pedal broke his registration plate!  I shall resist describing all the details, but the salient point is that the Police took no action, and even entered into deceit by claiming that my accident report had been ‘lost.’  However, when I ask
defaulted my MP to intervene, they changed their tune, suggesting a ‘misunderstanding’ and took the line that, as I was not badly hurt, and my Bike wasn’t excessively damaged, there was no reason to proceed.  (In complete contrast, my Insurance claim was settled 
defaultby return of post
default!)
defaultAt present, once a Car has been made legally ready for the road, it makes financial sense to use it as much as possible.  The Motor Taxation regime should be modified so that there would be minimal cost to leaving a Car parked or kept 
defaultat home, but much more to drive it.  In other words, the burden should be transferred from the static to the dynamic element.  This should involve all costs, including the bulk of the insurance premium.  Once a formal registration had taken place, basic th
defaultird-party insurance should be added to fuel costs.  (This would also help to obviate the common and increasing problem of uninsured Drivers.)  If a Driver desired to arrange additional insurance, he/she would be free to do so.
defaultThe Vehicle Excise Duty 
defaultshould be transferred on to the Fuel Tax, and the Disc displayed in the Vehicle Window would instead reflect Registration and Roadworthiness Certification (
defaultMoT
default Test.)  To discourage fraud, the shape of the Disc should be altered periodically and a duplicat
defaulte required for the rear Window of the Vehicle.  Apart from other considerations, this would make a false or out-of-date Disc easier for Police to spot in moving traffic.
default4) On the question of better infrastructure, all Traffic-calming measures such as Road
default Humps, Raised Tables and Speed Cushions etc. should be made Cycle-friendly by providing 
defaultsinusoidal ramp profiles
default on the entry and exit slopes.  Poorly-designed infrastructure can be a discouragement to Cycle-users.
default&#xa0;
default
default
defaultWhether it would be desirable and fea
defaultsible to segregate cyclists from other road users, including, for example, by prohibiting HGVs from entering city centres at peak hours.
default1) Although full segregation is often used in advanced Cycling Countries like The Netherlands, it has to be borne in mi
defaultnd that few urban Streets in 
defaultUK
default could accommodate this principle.  Furthermore, I fear that it would set a precedent in the minds of many Drivers of Motor Vehicles, who would then resent any incursion on other roads.  Instead, I would like to see Drivers e
defaultducated to the fact that Cycle-users have equal rights (and responsibilities) on the roads to motorised modes.  Sometimes, on narrow Carriageways, this shall result in the Bicycle governing the speed of the Traffic, if it is not safe for motor vehicles to 
defaultpass.
defaultI have seen a Report cited which found that accident rates on dedicated Cycle-Paths (presumably Bike to Bike) were higher than those on normal carriageways.  I cannot comment on the severity of those accidents.
default2) Similarly, I would hesitate to restr
defaultict HGV movements . . . If they are prevented from moving during one period, their movements shall merely be concentrated into other periods.  However, it may be advantageous to restrict their speed in City centres or other sensitive areas etc.  Cycle-orie
defaultnted safety equipment should be made mandatory.  Whatever recommendations are made, the fraught issue of policing is raised. 
default&#xa0;
default
default
defaultOther ideas for improving cycling safety would also be welcomed.
default1) I suggest that safety on the Mayor of London’s ‘Cycle Super
defaulthighway’ initiative could be improved by adding the broken white lines, as are normally seen with Advisory Lanes, and their width maintained at 2 metres 
defaultregardless of the carriageway width
default.
default2) As well as undergoing proper training, all Highway Engineers an
defaultd Transport Planners should be able to ride Bicycles.  (This may offend against equalities and/or disability legislation.)  I have been obliged to deal with Staff who 
defaulthave
default never ridden a Bike, yet they are charged with designing facilities and infrastructu
defaultre for Cycle-users to utilise.
defaultI trust that my comments and observations may be useful to the Members and assist informed discussion.
defaultI look forward to your acknowledgement in due course.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
defaultThere follows a copy of a recent Letter to a member of local Highways Staff, illustrating and reinforcing many of the points made in my main submission.  (Photos and other documents referred
default to are not included.)
defaultHello, 
defaultAt the close of a Cycle Liaison Group Meeting earlier this year, we had an informal discussion about Cycle Advisory Lane widths, during which you asked me: “Why do you want to ride one metre from the Kerb?”  For some 
defaultreason, we were interrupted and were unable to resume.
defaultThere are several sound reasons; allow me to enlighten you:
default• There are certain fairly obvious advantages i.e. to avoid drain grilles and manhole covers, roadside debris, and surface damage that custom
defaultarily 
defaultoccurs
default close to the Kerb, while obviating the need to swerve into the path of larger, faster-moving vehicles approaching from the rear.
default• To establish and assert a clear presence on the carriageway (in Cycle-training parlance: ‘taking the road.’)  Ob
defaultservations have shown that a Rider placed well away from the Kerb is commonly afforded a similar distance in clearance by passing (or attempting to pass) Vehicles, despite the absence of marked Lanes.  Conversely, a rider cowering close to the Kerb tempts 
defaultDrivers to pass by a much smaller margin — invariably, far too close.  It is this conduct we are seeking to eliminate.
default• If on the other hand, a Rider maintains a good distance of around one metre, yet a Driver 
defaultstill
default persists in forcing a passage, as menti
defaultoned by 
defaultAmandeep
default in his Central Romford Cycle Map, the Rider may still have sufficient space in which temporarily to manoeuvre away. 
default• As Amanda Burton has pointed out, it is especially important for Cyclists to maintain a good distance from the kerb when
default approaching left intersections, particularly when there is a filter lane — such as on the southbound carriageway of Mercury Gardens at the junction with Victoria Road and in the new arrangements at 
defaultRainham
default Village Tesco Superstore, where a left turn from 
defaultthe Viking Way extension leads to the Car Park.  If a Cyclist stays too far to the left, turning Drivers may presume that he/she is also turning (i.e. into 
defaultVictoria Road
default,) and cut across in front.
default• It is necessary to take account of the fact that the Bicy
defaultcle is an unstable vehicle, so it is virtually impossible to steer in an ideal straight line for any duration — especially with irregular road surfaces and/or blustery wind conditions.
defaultAs I have already pointed out to your Colleague, Cycle-users do not nee
defaultd road space to be ‘allocated’ to them.  Cyclists are already 
defaultfully entitled
default to all the space they require; it is the responsibility of Engineering and Transport Planning Staff to ensure that this entitlement is recognised, reflected, protected and 
defaultformalidefaultseddefault in the Lane markings installed.
defaultRegarding your fatuous comment that you have to deal with all other road-users as well, did you suppose that Cycling Advocates do not fully realise and accept this?  Most of us at the Cycle Liaison Group also hold a Driv
defaulting-Licence.  The salient point that you continue to miss is that 
defaultyou are not being asked to take any carriageway space away from Motor Vehicles in favour of Cycles THAT THE VEHICLES ARE NOT ALREADY OBLIGED TO RELINQUISH in the normal course of eventsdefault. 
defaultTh
defaulte Lane-width dimension that accurately and adequately reflects these requirements is 
defaulttwo metresdefault — that’s why it is clearly stated in your Design manual!  However, as I have explained to you — repeatedly, and at some length — because the 
defaultAdvisory Lane
default speci
defaultfication has no legal status, if necessary and it is safe to proceed (
defaulti.e
default when no Cycle is present,) it may be encroached in — so the 
defaulteffective overall carriageway width remains undiminisheddefault. 
defaultInstead, what 
defaultyou
default want is to confine Cycles to as narrow a band
default as you can get away with at the edge of the carriageway, so that the Motor Vehicles can whizz past unimpeded: 
defaultthat is approaching the situation from completely the wrong angledefault.  
defaultThe Advisory Lanes are intended to 
defaultinform
default and 
defaultguide
default Vehicle Drivers as to ho
defaultw much space they should leave when passing a Cycle.  Most Drivers already afford Cycle-Riders sufficient space, but a few do not — so it is at this group that the measures are aimed.  Conversely, by continuing your misinformed habit of restricting the Lan
defaulte markings to the 
defaultminimum
default recommended width, you are helping to bring 
defaultalldefault Vehicles closer to the Cyclist — thereby making matters worse! 
defaultAnother excuse that you proffered was that the two-metre Lanes would be mistaken for Parking Bays or 
defaultcause
default other confu
defaultsion.  To my response that Cycle-Logos may be added to obviate any such uncertainty, you stated that Staff 
defaultare
default limited in the Logos that can be used.  While this may be the case, it is essentially a ‘Red Herring,’ as there is no restriction on addition of 
defaultCycle Logos to Advisory Lanes: please see illustrations.
defaultAt various locations throughout the Borough, there are Parking Bays demarcated with broken white lines.  They are generally two metres wide and may be encroached in when unoccupied.  Therefore, for a
defaultll intents and purposes, they are directly comparable with Cycle Advisory Lanes.  The markings do not wear away prematurely, and they do not ‘lose their value’ when being encroached.  For the reasons given above, Cycle Advisory Lanes only ‘lose their value
default’ when they are made too narrow.  Consequently, you can see that Staff 
defaultare
default engaging in a substantial self-contradiction in their attitudes to Cycle facilities.
defaultThe photo taken in 
defaultFerry Lane
default, 
defaultRainham
default, shows my Bicycle in a 2m 
defaultDisabled
default 
defaultParking
default 
defaultBay
default.  If you i
defaultmagine a Rider on board, with a 
defaultPantechnicon
default passing close to the Bay, at some four times the speed, you should have no doubt of the wisdom of installing Advisory Lanes at the correct 2m width, to give beginner Riders the necessary confidence.
defaultWithout any 
defaultprompting, you readily accept that I have more advanced knowledge and experience relating to Cycling Issues than you.  Despite this, you seem determined to ignore all the good advice that I provide.  Moreover, if you have been engaged in these issues for s
defaultome 20 years, it is surprising (to say the least) that only now are you raising this fundamental question.
defaultI am sure that, if you were being completely honest with yourself, even you would 
defaultacknowledge the absurdity of Staff working on Cycling Infrastructur
defaulte matters when they have no dedicated training in this specialised area of Transport Planning or Highway Engineering.
defaultLastly, the attached item by the Journalist Kara Dolman, copied from The Evening Standard, illustrates very well the kind of Driver 
defaultattitude and behaviour that you are encouraging.
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease do not hesitate to contact me if you still require clarification of any point.
defaultRegards
defaultDavid S Garfield
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default