&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from Ben Colman (CYS0038)defaultWhether cycling is safe, particularly in towns and citiesdefaultAs a commuting cyclist, I believe that cycling has become safer over the last few years, as more people cycle. Perhaps this is because other road users have become more experienced in dealing with cyclists and because more of the vehicle drivers also cycle
default at times and have experienced poor driving – so they have changed their behaviour. 
defaultGenerally, the debate needs to change from cyclists v other road users, to good road users and poor road users. I believe that enforcement of poor road use (for all users)
default should be more comprehensive – maybe short campaigns, where poor cyclists, poor drivers are penalised. I would also like to see more use of video training so that drivers experience what it is like on a bicycle (there are lots of youtube clips available w
defaulthich are frankly terrifying) and cyclists can see the hazards they cause – perhaps this could be incorporated into penalties more than it currently is – go on the course and reduce your penalty.
defaultWhat central and local Government could do to improve cyclingdefault safety.defaultBetter standards for cycle lanes/paths
default applied nationally
default – there are some very good examples, but many are worse than useful. As an example, on Langworthy Road South, the cycle lane is a shared footpath, with a solid line. This is ignored by pede
defaultstrians and cyclists. Additionally, there are a number of side streets into industrial areas which have right of way over the cycle lane. As a cyclists I would have to dodge the pedestrians and keep stopping to check behind me for cars and vans turning ont
defaulto the side street. I don’t do this as I am trying to get from a to b quickly. Consequently, I use the road, which annoys the drivers who can see a cycle lane, without understanding why a cyclist isn’t using it. 
defaultMany 
defaultsegregated cycle paths are not wide eno
defaultugh and are not cleaned frequently enough, so are covered in broken glass, wet leaves etc. making them hazardous. Cycle lanes that are too narrow or finish/start unexpectedly are also a hazard as it can lead to inconsistent moves by cyclists – further in a
defaultnd out of the kerb. 
defaultImproved planning – I have seen a number of new retails developments which do not appear to provide any cycle parking.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default