&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Thompsons Solicitors (CYS0047)
defaultThompsons Solicitors has been standing up for the injured and mistreated since the firm was founded by Harry Thompson in 1921. We have fought for millions of people, won countless landmark cases and secured key legal reforms. We have a network of 28 office
defaults across the UK, including the separate legal jurisdictions of Scotland and Northern Ireland. 
defaultWe are experienced in dealing with cycle accident 
defaultpersonal inj
defaultury compensation claims
default and also have specialist teams of solicitors based across our network of offices who are experts in dealing with claims for 
defaultserious injuries
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur case experience shows us that, almost without exception, when cyclists are killed and injured it is an avoidable accident in which a motorist has been in some way negligent.
defaultSuggesting that if a cyclist has failed to, say, wear
default high visibility clothing then an accident is “their fault” is to approach the question the wrong way. 
default&#xa0;
defaultYes, there are issues about the way cyclists appear and behave, but they are (properly) dealt with by a court in terms of contributory negligence. The f
defaultact remains that cyclists are fundamentally vulnerable. They are easily maimed, mutilated, paralysed and killed. The same vulnerability does not apply to the occupants of motor vehicles.
default&#xa0;
default1. Case studies
defaulti. Our client was injured in the middle of the day w
defaulthen a
default&#xa0;
defaultlorry turned left across his path without having indicated and ran him over.
defaultHe suffered extensive injuries including a
default&#xa0;
defaultfractured jaw,
default&#xa0;
defaultright elbow, wrist, pelvis and scapula and a punctured lung. He has continued
default&#xa0;
defaultmemory loss and difficulty 
defaultconcentrating and has had to move back home with his parents for them to care for him.
default&#xa0;
defaultii. Our client was cycling up a country road.
default&#xa0;
defaultA driver, allegedly blinded by the sun, made no attempt to slow down (as any prudent person would do) and hit the back of 
defaultthe cyclist, causing them to flip backwards onto the front of the car.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe client is now bed ridden in hospital receiving constant care with severe brain injuries.
default&#xa0;
defaultiii. A motorist pulled onto a roundabout straight into the path of our client. The client 
defaultsuffered significant scarring to the face.
defaultiv. Woman cyclist killed while wearing a helmet &amp; high visibility jacket. A car turned across, hit and killed her. The driver said he never saw her because of low-lying sun. 
defaultHe was prosecuted but acquitted.
defaultv. Wom
defaultan cyclist crushed against railings by a LGV who
default&#xa0;
defaultappeared not to have noticed our client, or at least thought there was sufficient space to pass her. 
defaultShe s
defaultuffered serious leg injuries.
default&#xa0;
defaultvi. A firefighter cycling to work was hit by a car emerging from a sid
defaulte road and
default&#xa0;
defaultsuffered 
defaulta fractured upper jaw, detached broken mandible, a fractured humerus and a shattered elbow and ulna on the left arm together with de-gloving of the upper right arm, a partially collapsed left lung and two broken vertebrae
default. 
defaultOur client is
default s
defaulttill unable to work several years later.
defaultvii. Our client was cycling to work with a colleague when a delivery lorry overtook them and then failed to allow appropriate distance when pulling back in, knocking both cyclists off their bicycles. The driver fa
defaultiled to stop. Our client suffered soft tissue injuries to his shoulder, wrist and knee.
default&#xa0;
defaultviii. As our client passed
default,
default a vehicle pulled over on the left hand side of the road, the driver,
default&#xa0;
defaultwithout signalling, did a U turn in my client’s path. Our client lande
defaultd face down in the road, suffering extensive
default&#xa0;
defaultdental damage requiring implant and bone grafting for the rest of his life. He also sustained moderate soft tissue injuries.
default&#xa0;
defaultix. Our client was knocked off his bike, sustaining a minor brain injury (despite the
default fact that he was wearing a helmet)
default.  I
defaultn addition
default, he sustained
default a fractured clavicle 
defaultand a dislocated fracture to 
defaulthis right hand when suddenly and without warning, the Defendant attempted to change lanes into the near side lane, as our client was cycling p
defaultast. 
defaultThree
default years on 
defaultand 
defaulthe's still suffering with the effects of the brain injury which is now impacting not only on his personal life, but also his job. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Defendant was subsequently prosecuted by the police for driving without due care and attention, receiving 
defaultfour
default points on his licence and a £150 fine.
defaultx. Our client was knocked off his bicycle by a juggernaut which failed to stop. As a result of the acc
defaultident, he sustained multiple soft tissue injuries, lacerations requiring stitches and a fracture to his pelvis. The cyclist was wearing a helmet and high visibility clothing.
default&#xa0;
default2.
default&#xa0;
default LGV driver education
defaultAs can be seen from the case examples above, lorries ar
defaulte a real threat to cyclists and the rest of Thompsons’ caseload confirms this. LGV drivers are more likely to hit cyclists, and to inflict greater injury when they do.
defaultWe believe that gaining some experience of cycling in road conditions should form part o
defaultf all LGV and PCV driving tests and form part of the Driver Certificate of 
defaultProfessional Competence.
default Nobody should be allowed to drive an LGV or PCV unless they have experienced what it is like to ride a bike on the road in traffic.
default3. Strict liability and 
defaultculture
defaultThe Courts have recognised that, in accidents between vehicles and pedestrians, consideration should be given to different vulnerabilities of the parties.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are, as has often been held, two aspects to apportioning responsibility between
default 
defaultclaimant and defendant, the respective causative potency of what they have done, and their respective blameworthiness:……. The court 'has consistently imposed upon the drivers of cars a high burden to reflect the fact that the car is
default 
defaultpotentially a dangerous
default weapon'
defaultEagle v Chambers, Court of Appeal [2003] EWCA Civ 1107
defaultWe believe the law now needs to go further than this. Road traffic accidents in the Netherlands are governed by a law of ‘strict liability’, the aim of which is to protect vulnerable road user
defaults from more powerful road users. Under strict liability, the presumption in an RTA is that the more powerful road user is liable unless it can be clearly demonstrated that they are not.
defaultWe recommend strict liability is introduced in the UK in all cases inv
defaultolving cyclists.
default Combined with an education campaign, strict liability could serve, as well as improving the legal environment, to change the prevailing culture. Currently, motorists appear alienated from the physical environment and to behave often as tho
defaultugh they ‘own the road’. Strict liability – in which cyclists have a certain priority - may go some way to help reverse this presumption.
default&#xa0;
default4. Trouble spots.
defaultOur experience suggests that serious injuries to cyclists occur very disproportionately in particul
defaultar “trouble spots”. Notorious ones in London, for instance, would include the Bow roundabout and the area around Kings Cross and St Pancras stations.
defaultWe would propose that there should be a statutory duty put on local authorities to monitor the emergence o
defaultf such trouble spots and to promulgate remedies effective within a fixed time period.
default5. New road developments
defaultNew road developments, by their nature, tend to expand car and LGV capacity, but rarely extend cycling capacity commensurately, or protect vulner
defaultable cyclists from such extensions of car and LGV capacity.
defaultWe would propose that such duties as exist to consider cyclists when planning new 
defaultroad architecture should be considerably strengthened.
default It should be a duty not merely to 
defaultconsider
default cyclists, but to
default 
defaultdemonstrate
default that their safety and amenity is enhanced in any new development by an amount at least equal to any benefits which accrue to motorists.
default6. Better training for cyclists
defaultCyclists are generally not complicit in their own injury. Nevertheless, the
defaulty are vulnerable, and as such they need better training than most cyclists currently receive. 
defaultBetter quality training should be made more widely available at low or no cost through the intervention of local and central government.
defaultIn particular, Highway Code rules 59-82 relating to cyclists and rules 72-73 (vehicles turning) and rule 78 (large vehicles and roundabouts) need to be better understood by cyclists and motorists alike, and better enforced. 
defaultThe rules are already in place.
default What needs to improve is understanding of them and their observation by both cyclists and motorists, and the 
defaultconsistency
default and quality of their enforcement.
defaultMost of the above c
defaultan be best achieved by better education and training.
default7. Motorists are more likel
defaulty to fail to stop
defaultEven our small cross-section of case studies demonstrates what our wider caseload shows to be another theme: that motorists are more likely to fail to stop at the scene of an RTA if the victim is a cyclist.
defaultThis obviously has serious adve
defaultrse implications for the cyclist’s ability to get either redress in the civil or justice in the criminal courts.
defaultThis is a serious matter which we believe merits proper investigation by the Transport Committee and the Government.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default