Written evidence submitted by Rights Watch UK (JRR 0009)default default&#xa0;defaultOur Mission: defaultPromoting human rights and holding governments to account, drawing upon the lessons learned from the conflict in Northern Ireland. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur Expertise and Achievements: defaultSince 1990 we have provided support and services to anyone whose human rights were violated
default as a result of conflict. Our interventions have reflected our range of expertise, from the right to a fair trial to the government’s positive obligation to protect life. We have a long record of working closely with NGOs and government authorities to shar
defaulte that expertise. And we have received wide recognition, as the first winner of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe’s Human Rights Prize in 2009 alongside other honours.
defaultOur Judicial Review Experience: defaultWe have substantial experience as a th
defaultird party intervener in a number of judicial review applications before the courts of England and Wales and Northern Ireland.  We have intervened as both a sole third party intervener and as a co-intervener with other NGOs.  Our interventions have included
default a range of human rights engaged issues including the length of pre-charge detention in terrorist cases
default and
default the certification of trial without jury in Northern Ireland
default.  In addition we intervened in an application engaging minority language rights 
defaultregarding
default the 
defaultreasonable 
defaultexpectation to speak Irish in the courts in Northern Ireland.  We have also intervened in applications before the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR).  Our most recent co-intervention before the ECtHR was in 
defaultA
defaultl-Saadoon and Mufdh
defaulti v UK
default [61498/08] following litiga
defaulttion before the domestic courts on the issues of the jurisdiction of the European Convention of Human Rights and the Human Rights Act 1998.  We are in the process of developing a human rights strategic litigation policy.
defaultR
defaultights watch (UK) has responded to both the Consultations of the Ministry of Justice regarding judicial review.  Our submissions to the Joint Committee on Human Rights are limited to the issues arising from the latter Consultation paper “Judicial Review 
default(CM
default 8703) encompassing questions of standing and intervention and costs.
default”
default 
defaultStanding and InterventionsdefaultWe see
default no 
defaultproblem in a judicial review application 
defaultbeing 
defaultmade
default by a claimant with no direct interest in the matter
default.
default 
default In particular
default when the case involves issu
defaultes encompassing human rights, the Human Rights Act 1998 (HRA98)
default,
default which partially incorporates the European 
defaultConvention
default on 
defaultHuman
default Rights 1950 (the Convention)
default,
default and the powers invested in the judiciary to strike down aspects of policy and legislation which are found to be incompatible with the Convention
default. The purpose of 
defaulta 
defaultjudicial review 
defaultby the judiciary 
defaultis to hold the 
defaulte
defaultxecutive to account
default in the exercise of its 
defaultpower
default 
defaultwhen engaged in 
defaultdecision making
default on the implementation of legislation or policy. 
default  
defaultI
defaultn
default matters
default relating to the exercise of executive power
default 
defaultwhen human rights are engaged
default, it is in the public interest
default that 
defaultthe exercise of these powers
default,
default which raise 
defaulthuman 
defaultrights based 
defaultchallenges
default,
default can 
defaultbe 
defaultbrought to the attention of the 
defaultjudiciary 
defaultfor review 
defaultT
defaulthe public has an interest in the operation of this process, as well as in th
defaulte substantive issues concerned specifically when there has been a
defaultn
default actual or possible
default human ri
defaultghts violation, an issue of incompatibility 
defaultbetween domestic law and the Convention 
defaultor 
defaultthe possibility of 
defaultderogation
default from an Article of the Convention. 
defaultIn terms of specific problems that would arise from a more restrictive test for standing, we are concer
defaultned about the impact this would have on 
defaulthuman rights 
defaultNGO
defaults in particular and their
default ability to engage in the judicial review process. An NGO 
defaultcan hold an
default important position 
defaultin civil society 
defaultthat bridges the gap between a particular legislative 
defaultinstrument or p
defaultolicy 
defaultproposal
default,
default and those 
defaultdirectly or potentially 
defaultaffected by it. It is 
defaultpossible
default that in some situations members of the public would be unaware of particular legislative details that would affect the
defaultir human rights, a
defaultnd an NGO plays an important role in re
defaultpresenting 
defaultand assisting individuals and 
defaultgroups to ensure they are not 
defaultdetrimentally affected by any such proposals
default which interfere with their human rights, and by extension the rights held within wider society. 
default&#xa0;
defaultRights Watch (UK) understands 
defaultthat the 
defaultpolicy motor driving 
defaultthe proposed 
defaultreforms
default to standing
default 
defaultin judicial review 
defaultinterventions
default is the incorrect assumption put forth in the 
defaultC
defaultonsultation that “Parliament and the elected Government are best placed to determine what is in the public interest” (
defaultp
defaultarag
defaultraphs 79-80). We
default consider
default this 
default to be
default fundamentally wrong in the context of judicial review 
defaultand human rights
default, specifically
default 
defaultwhen it is 
defaultthe operation of executive
default 
defaultpowers 
defaultthat are being scrutinised
default and challenged to remedy or prevent human rights 
defaultviolations
default.
default 
default This may be
default directly by the state
default,
default  through 
defaulta 
defaultfailure of the state to protect human rights
default,
default or through a failure to comply with the Convention or under the HRA98
default. 
defaultThe present Consultation 
defaultmisunderstands the purpose of judicial review and 
defaultthe need for 
defaultpubl
defaultic scrutiny 
defaultof 
defaultexecutive decision
default-making
default.   This is particularly important when 
defaulthuman rights issues (broadly defined and interpreted) are engaged
default given the primacy of the Convention and its effect under the HRA98
default and the powers of the judiciary to make dec
defaultlarations of incompatibility. 
default 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultA similar concern can be seen in the context of the proposals 
defaultregarding access to 
defaultlegal aid, where the assessment of 
defaultfinancial eligibility 
defaultis 
defaultin 
defaultpart based on the prospects of success 
default(merits) 
defaultof the case. In our opinion, the mere process of investigating and reviewing 
defaultparticular executive 
defaultactions is essential to 
defaultthe process of 
defaulteffective public scrutiny and this is placed in danger if the process is amended 
defaultalong the lines proposed by the govern
defaultment. 
defaultIt may be that in other areas the 
defaultg
defaultovernment
default’s
default superior expertise would be a convincing argument, but we do not 
defaultconsider
default that it is justified in th
defaulte
default context
default of what is fundamentally a constitutional challenge
default. The proposed 
default restriction 
defaulthas the effect
default of 
defaultreducing scrutiny and
default 
defaultaccountability
default on issues of huma
defaultn rights
default which have possible supranational consequences
default. It would also impact on the powers vested in the judiciary to strike down as incompatible 
defaultlegislation and 
defaultpolicy 
defaultwhich offends the Convention
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA 
defaultmore 
defaultrestrictive test for standing would place 
defaultboth 
defaultthe effectiveness and 
defaultthe 
defaultpotential benefits of judicial review in an even more vulnerable position by limiting those who could challenge to individuals or groups that are
default,
default in the 
defaultg
defaultovernment’s persp
defaultective
default,
default most 
defaultengaged
default. 
default Assuming that 
defaultjudicial review 
defaultis
default a 
defaultconstitutional 
defaulttool for accountability
default exercised by the judiciary in relation to the executive
default, the whole of society has an interest in ensuring it is used to its full 
defaultextent and 
defaultpotential and a 
defaultmore restrictive test for standing misunderstands
default 
defaultthis. 
defaultOf particular concern is the issue of when a human rights based challenged needs to be made when 
defaultthe effect of 
defaultdomestic policy or legislation is potentially incompatible with the Convention
default.  
defaultJudicial
default review remains the primary vehicle through which such a human
default rights challenge can be bought and this should be protected. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe stress
default judicial review in relation to human rights 
defaultis not a campaigning 
defaulttool 
defaultbut 
defaultis an issue of assistance and representation, 
defaultgovernment 
defaultaccountability
default and human rights compliance
default. 
defaultFurthermore, it is not clear what issues may arise in the future and a more liberal approach to standing
default,
default such as 
defaultexists presently
default,
default 
defaultallows for such flexibility as issues evolve. 
default The presence of an NGO
default adding value to a judicial review application or as claimant asserts the importance of civil society in the litigation system and enables a broader consideration of factors introduced by those with expertise and knowledge to be taken by the judiciary in i
defaultts consideration of the challenge made in the application. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA more restrictive test for standing not only misunderstands the nature and purpose of judicial review as a constitutional tool, but also may mean in specific cases that there is no 
defaultindividual or
default group 
defaultclaimant to challenge a decision
default in the exercise of power or policy
default when human rights issues are engaged
default. For example, there may be cases where a particular policy has not had a direct effect on an individual yet or the individual is unable to bring
default a challenge.
default 
defaultThe standing of a human rights 
defaultNGO would therefore ensure that these human rights concerns are 
defaultventilated
default before the courts ensuring the executive does not escape its human rights obligations
default or avoid human rights compliance
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn our view, the 
defaultg
defaultovernment has failed to explain why the current test for standing is unsatisfactory. There is no evidence to suggest that the courts misapply the current test in a way that leads to problems asserted by the 
defaultg
defaultovernment such as “to seek pub
defaultlicity” or “hinder the process of proper decision-making” (
defaultp
defaultaragraphs 79-80)
default (however ‘proper’ decision-making is defined)
default. Therefore
default,
default we do not 
defaultconsider
default that any of the proposed alternatives would be more reasonable. 
default 
defaultThe current test for standing allows 
defaultfor flexibility that depends on context and issue whilst at the same time recognising the importance of judicial review in assessing 
defaultthe exercise of executive powers
default specifically when h
defaultuman rights issues are engaged and where human rights compliance is in 
defaultquestion. 
default&#xa0;
defaultCosts and Pdefaultermissidefaulton default&#xa0;defaultThe government has suggested 
defaultthat providers should onl
defaulty be paid for work carried out in
default an application for judicial review in cases either where permission is granted or where the LAA exercises its discretion to pay the provider in a case where proceedings are issued but the case concludes prior to a permission decision
default.
default 
defaultWe do not agree with
default the above 
defaultgovernment 
defaultproposal. 
defaultSpecifically in relation to human rights challenges through judicial review i
defaultt would discourage
default public
default lawyers from 
defaultundertaking
default 
defaultapplications for judicial review as the financial risk
default,
default if the case does not proceed beyond 
defaultthe 
defaultpermission 
defaultstage
default,
default 
defaultwill lie with them
default and permission stage is inevitably challenged by the government through the Treasury Solicitors
default. 
defaultPublic l
defaultawyers 
defaultcannot 
defaultbe expected to bear 
defaultthis
default financial burden
default on matters as urgent as human rights 
defaultas it would mean that
default the focus of the application would be the financ
defaultial risk
default as opposed to the benefit to the cl
defaultaimant
default whose human rights are in issue
default or the potential 
defaultwider public interest 
defaultimportance of the application.
default 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultgovernment’s 
defaultproposal would lead to judicial re
defaultview cases being restricted to those who could bear the financial risks associated with proceeding to 
defaultthe Administrative 
defaultcourt, thus reducing the ability of many members of the public and 
defaultcivil society 
defaultorganisations
default such as human rights NGOs
default to challenge important policy decisions of the executive
default which have implications for human rights
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultFor example
default the important recent Supreme Court judicial review judgment in
default 
defaultOsborne and Booth v The Parole Board; In the application of James Clyde Reilly 
defaultfor Judicial Review (Northern Ireland)
default [2013] UKSC 61
default might not have been taken if the current funding proposals had been in place because public lawyers instructed on behalf of the claimants would have been deterred by the financial risk incurred in under
defaulttaking preliminary work before the permission stage. 
defaultThis case engaged human rights principles articulated in both common law and under the Convention. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFurthermore, the proposal undermines the purposes of judicial review and legal aid. 
default 
defaultJudicial review s
defaulthould enable members of society to challenge 
defaultthe actions and decisions of the 
defaultexecutive and this ability should be based on the importance of the policy and 
defaultthe merits of the challenge
default,
default 
defaultnot the ability to fund such a challenge. Legal aid should enable thos
defaulte who cannot afford legal assistance to engage in the judicial review process and obtain the legal representation that is necessary to ensure fair legal access irrespective of finances
default.  This is with the safeguard that the judiciary determines standing and
default that the public interest should be defined within the context of the balance and the separation of powers between the judiciary, the legislature and the executive
default. 
default When human rights issues are engaged then this demand for open access to justice becomes a
defaultn imperative. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe proposal 
defaultundermines 
defaultth
defaultese principles 
defaultby distinguishing which stages of the process 
defaultmerit 
default financial assistance, i.e. only if it satisfies the permission stage. 
defaultThis 
defaultdistinction 
defaultoffends the equality of arms principle
default which is 
defaultenshrined
default in the Convention jurisprudence
default.  
defaultHowever, the preparatory stage 
defaultof a judicial review application 
defaultis 
defaultimportant in the 
defaultprocess and 
defaultlegal service 
defaultproviders should not be expected to bear the costs themselves. The proposal also means that a decision about wh
defaultich cases are the most deserving is determining the availability of legal assistance. Legal representation is fundamental to the whole process
default of judicial review 
defaultand should not be dependent on the case reaching a certain stage
default, contested by the government
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultRestricting funds 
defaultuntil
default after the permission stage would discourage many
default public 
defaultlawyers from engaging in the process at
default the preliminary s
defaulttage, further reducing the number of judicial review applications. This reduction would be based on 
defaultthe 
defaultinability to
default meet the costs, which would have a detrimental 
defaulte
defaultffect on the most vulnerable members of society. Far from meeting the 
defaultg
defaultovernment’s objectives of reducing judicial review to cases that are the most important (a judg
defaulte
defaultment that is based on a flawed presumpti
defaulton that the 
defaultg
defaultovernment is 
defaultalways 
defaultbest placed to decide who is most deserving) it would only serve to skew judicial review applications to those with greater financial resources and exclude members of society who are most vulnerable in the face of the propo
defaultsals that require challenge. 
defaultThese are the members of society whose human rights will often b
defaulte
default the subject of the application. 
default&#xa0;
defaultProtective defaultCdefaultost defaultOrdersdefault default&#xa0;defaultThe government has asked 
defaultwhether it is appropriate to stipulate that PCOs will not be available in any
default case where there is an individual or private interest regardless of whether th
defaultere is a wider public interest.  
defaultWe oppose the restriction of the availability of PCOs. We do not 
defaultconsider
default it is suitable to prevent PCOs being available in a case where there i
defaults an individual or private interest in the case. The public interest in the case is the most important 
defaultform of 
defaultinterest and it would not be appropriate to restrict PCOs just because there is also a private or individual interest at stake. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe proposals w
defaultould generate greater uncertainty for claimants who may be 
defaultdeterred 
defaultby the costs they may 
defaultincur
default if their 
defaultapplication
default is unsuccessful. It would create a chilling effect by placing financial barriers on those who w
defaultant
default to engage in the 
defaultjudicial review 
defaultprocess
default. NGOs and vulnerable individuals who would not be able to bear the financial risk that would be associated if the availability of PCOs was limited would be discouraged from bringing claims which might be important to bring in the public interest. This wou
defaultld especially be true for NGOs whose role involves bringing cases to the attention of the court and the public even if the policy has not had a direct effect on an individual 
defaultor group as of 
defaultyet. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is a link between the importance of bringing the case
default into the public attention by NGOs who may take on the responsibility if the policy is not publicly known yet, and the consequent chilling effect because they are hindered by the potential costs. Sometimes, it is important for issues to be brought to the a
defaultttention of the public and the courts, even if in the particular case is not successful as it
default is 
default  the process of challenge
default in itself
default that must be preserved, and this should not depend upon financial resources. 
defaultNGO funding is reliant on a mixture of philan
defaultthropy or other form of 
defaultmembership
default subscription.  Those funding NGO work in terms of strategic litigation would also be deterred from funding if they were to be co-joined as potential bears of litigation risk costs
default,
default as would corporate sponsors (for example
default pro bono units of commercial law firms) who might be exposed to unacceptable unquantifiable costs in public interest litigation.
default&#xa0;defaultThe government asks h
defaultow could the principles for making a PCO be modified to ensure a better balance a) between the parties to litigation and b) between providing access to the courts with the 
defaultinterests of the taxpayer? 
default 
defaultWe do not 
defaultconsider
default that the principles for making a PCO 
defaultshould be modified. The public interest at stake in bringing certain cases to the attention of the courts should not be dictated to by the financial security of the parties. It not only restricts access to the legal process itself, but also jeopardises the
default purpose of judicial review as it may mean that cases that are in the public interest (yet 
defaultmay 
defaultalso involve 
defaultindividual
default or group
default 
defaultinterests) are not brought to the attention of the court and the policy would go unchallenged. 
default&#xa0;defaultFurther, w
defaulte do not 
defaultconsider
default tha
defaultt the source of funding should be relevant to the consideration of a PCO. The principles that currently govern the availability of PCOs are sufficient to achieve their purpose of protecting claimants from undue financial burdens and the source of funding i
defaults not relevant for that purpose. 
default For example, 
defaultNGOs are sponsored either through public subscription (membership) or by private philanthropy.  To require disclosure beyond what is available in the public domain through the Charity Commission is an unnecess
defaultary and pervasive invasion into the fund
defaulting
default arrangements of these civil society organisation
defaults
default.
default&#xa0;defaultCosts arising from the involvement of defaultTdefaulthird defaultPdefaultarty defaultIdefaultntervenersdefault&#xa0;
defaultThe government asks whether third parties who choose to intervene in judicial review claims
default can
default be responsible in principle for their own legal costs of doing so, such that they should not, ordinarily, be able to claim those costs from either the claimant or the defendant? 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe do not 
defaultconsider 
defaultthat a
defaultn NGO
default third party intervener should be 
defaultliable 
defaultfor 
defaulttheir own legal costs. We are concerned that the proposals relat
defaulting
default to third party interveners would have a detrimental impact on the role of NGOs and other important actors in the judicial review process. This is because making a
defaultn NGO
default third-party interven
defaulter liable for their own costs not only impacts negatively on the quality of the decision b
defaulty
default dissuading parties who may add substantive and significant arguments from intervening, but would also have a disproportionate effect on the ability of NGOs and char
defaultities to engage in the judicial review process, insulating the executiv
defaulte further from proper scrutiny and accounta
defaultbility in the exercise of power and demonstrating human rights compliance.
default&#xa0;
defaultThird party interventions can be extremely beneficial to the quali
defaultty of the decision making process in the 
defaultapplication
default. They may be able to bring additional expertise and arguments, particularly if they are an interest group that represents a particular group 
defaultwithin 
defaultsociety or 
defaultan 
defaultissue. The rules on costs might therefore
default discourage those who could bring something significant to the case due to their inability to bear the financial burden, particularly if they are an NGO with 
defaultrestricted 
defaultfinancial resources. This would consequently 
defaultlimit
default the ability of NGOs to engage in the
default judicial review process in general as the costs would prove a practical hindrance. This would furthermore affect the effectiveness of the judicial review process by limiting those who can engage in it to the financially stable and resourceful. Such a poli
defaultcy would again misunderstand the role of judicial review as a tool for the public to 
defaultchallenge the decision making function of 
defaultexecutive power
defaults
default by dictating the process along the lines of costs rather than the importance of 
defaultthe public interest/human rights
default issues in play.
default&#xa0;defaultFrom a practical perspective, the quality of the decision making process may be hindered if certain arguments or opinions are excluded. It may lead to an increase in subsequent costs because of the need for further litigation if important
default points are not raised or clarified in the original case due to a costs barrier. There is no real evidence to support the assertion that third party interveners greatly increase the costs in the first place, and their participation at the outset may lead t
defaulto a more efficient and thorough consideration of 
defaultthe 
defaultissues in the 
defaultapplication
default. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe intervention of a third party 
defaultNGO 
defaultmay bring an important 
defaultperspective to 
defaultthe 
defaultapplication 
defaultthat would not have otherwise been considered. The benefits that they can bring mean they should not 
defaultbe responsible for any additional costs that may be incurred. Furthermore, any intervention is at the discretion of the court who are in the best position 
defaultto restrict the involvement if it may not add anyt
defaulthing of value to the process. 
defaultA key consideration in deciding whether to apply to make a third party intervention in a judicial review is whether the intervention will add value to the application
default, and thus
default appropriate safeguards are already in place.
default 
default&#xa0;default27 November 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default