LGO 81
defaultLocal 
defaultgovernment procurement spend of £45bn a year represents a huge opportunity for investment in the UK and local economies, whilst delivering improved value for money for taxpayers. Local government has not, overall, delivered these objectives because of 
defaultthe
default fragmented management of its procurement spend, lack of coherent strategy and limited expertise available to most councils. 
defaultA policy of local procurement, without a much more sophisticated approach, is a zero sum game. Some councils will benefit
default.
default Other
defaults
default will lose. A coherent and more sophisticated approach is needed to boost overall expenditure with UK and local suppliers. 
defaultThe way the spend data are collected flatters the local spend figures. Also, research by the North West Centre of Excellence, when I was director, suggested that local councils mostly used suppliers with whom business had been done for many years, 
defaultrather than
default those likely to generate economic growth. Ways to increase local procurement include:
defaultSophisticated approaches must be used to take cost and risk out of supply chains and products. Typical improvements may be 15%. Thus, councils will have more money to spend on front line services
default,
default which should create more local employment. 
defaultAchieving the above requires expertise in all markets that few, if any, councils can afford if they act independently. Appropriate aggregation of procurement spend will help local government to use its economic power to achieve its objectives. 
defaultCollaboration accounts for just 15% of spend despite great commonality in products, services, suppliers and the knowledge and techniques needed. There is scope to increase this greatly.
defaultProcurement exists to support councils 
defaultto 
defaultdeliver the services that residents need. A
default local government owned 
defaultintegrated procurement network, consisting of national and regional centres of expertise (please refer to the Appendix) would provide councils with the capability needed without impinging on local democracy. It is suggested that the LGA and SOLACE work up a proposal to create such a model
default, obtain support from sufficient councils 
defaultand seek funding from DCLG to build-up the capability of the best procurement teams in local government into such centres and invest in improving commissioning. The precedent is that extra funding has been found to support radical procurement initiatives for the NHS and central government.
default17 November 2013
default&#xa0;defaultAPPENDIX  defaultINTEGRATED PROCUREMENT NETWORKdefault:default CENTRES OF EXPERTISEdefault&#xa0;defaultSpecialist National Centres:default&#xa0;
defaultRegional/Geographical Centres:default&#xa0;
defaultLocal Procurementdefault&#xa0;
defaultOther Featuresdefault&#xa0;
defaultCommissioningdefault&#xa0;
default17 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default