&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the 
defaultF
defaultederation of 
defaultS
defaultmall 
defaultB
defaultusinesses
default (LTD0001)
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe federation of Small 
defaultBusinesses thanks you for the opportunity to respond to your inquiry.
default&#xa0;
defaultSmall businesses depend on their car or van to operate their business - 
default65 per cent of small firmsdefault s
defaultaid their car or van is crucial to their business. 
defaultRead MoredefaultThe FSB
default have warneddefault that more needs to be done to address the problem of congestion and the state of repair o
defaultf UK roads, in order to get businesses moving and growing. A 
defaultwell functioning
default transport system incorporating all modes of transport, rather than looking at each mode individually is crucial to small rural businesses. 
defaultWe argue that
default more strategic planning and management of transport can help markets work more effectively. 
defaultRebalancing the funds collected from road users and the amount idefaultnvested back into improving the road networkdefault would prevent the poor state of roads and high levels of congestion from costing small firms. Devolved decision making, with 
defaultOur
default research shows
default that half of small businesses believe the poor state of the UK's roads has 
defaultcost their business up to £5,000 in the past 12 monthsdefault. This is a huge figure considering that the average turn
defaultover for small firms is around £500,000. The survey showed that 66% of our members said that the state of repair of the roads has had a negative impact on their business and 61% businesses have been affected due to traffic congestion. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the current stru
defaultcture, the FSB in Coventry &amp; Warwickshire has concerns over who and how inter-regional or other major cross boundary transport infrastructure needs will be addressed in the future if 
defaultLEPs receive a Single Local Growth Fund, from 2015 and presuming that 
defaultDfT
default and Highways Agency remits will be reduced.  At this stage we do not know if LEPs have views wide enough to consider regional/inter-regional needs and how this will be managed to ens
defaulture we have an integrated strategic road structure. 
default              
defaultThe existing structure of a local transport body (LTB), although has private sector involvement it is heavily weighted to the priorities of local authorities, and therefore comes with the politics of h
defaultaving 2 or more authorities, often of differing political parties, agreeing priorities within a LEP area.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe competitive process of bidding against neighbouring LEP 
defaultarea’s
default is not conducive to a joined up approach. For an area like Coventry &amp; Warwickshire
default that is surrounded by a number of other LEPs and is impacted by a vast road structure, it is difficult to prioritise and to best make use of a limited budget.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs mentioned above we do not believe the current structure allows for clear guidance on how int
defaulter
default-regional or other major cross boundary transport infrastructure needs will be addressed. Small businesses are not interested in the politics (who and why is responsible), and instead would prefer the improvements to be made efficiently, on time and with
defaultin budget.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also feel that second tier road networks need reviewing. Our view is that there should be a fully dual carriageway network for major/non-motorway road journeys or where there are sizeable gaps in the motorway network. We also feel that accid
defaultent records should be given greater consideration when investing in transport and road improvements.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would also like to see (when/if LEPs receive a 
defaultSingle Local Growth Fund) 
defaulthow can we ensure that SMEs get their rightful dues as opposed to it being 'lo
defaultst' within wider 'loose' local authority transport activities or ambitions. Possibly clearer guidance 
defaulton  who
default LTB’s or LEP priorities funding is required.
default&#xa0;
defaultIf constructed sensibly, we would see that one benefit of a more local delivery would be the emphasi
defaults on local 
default'bottlenecks' where congestion extends beyonddefault&#xa0;defaultcommuting timesdefault. In our region we have 
defaultindentified
default the following bottlenecks that we think need consideration and feel the LEP’s should give greater consideration too;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultLocal bottle necks and small scale improvements, if improved would have a huge positive impact on local residents and businesses, but often get overlooked for the large scale developments. A more 
defaultlocalised
default approac
defaulth would hopefully ensure this wasn’t the case. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur region feels that the lines of accountability are unclear. Despite the creation of an LTB, the local authorities and transport authority still take the lead on delivery and are accountable for the fundin
defaultg. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default default