&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence
default from Dr Tabitha 
defaultTanqueray
default (CYS 061)
default&#xa0;
defaultI use a bicycle as my main form of transport in London, whether commuting to work, travelling to the West End to see a play or taking my 9-month-old and 3-year-old children to 
defaultnursery in a cargo-bike. I have to be hyper-alert and mind-read other road users. I have to predict when a taxi is about to pull over immediately in front of me, or a stationary car is about to pull out into the road (manouevre, mirror, signal). However ca
defaultreful I am, I can’t pre
defaultvent ‘close passes’ from driver
defaults who just don’t respect a cyclist’s right to be in the road. Although 95% of drivers seem to be careful, the remaini
defaultng 5% can certainly terrify and –in many cases- 
defaultactually injure us.
default&#xa0;
defaultI work as an ana
defaultesthetic consultant, and I have experienced the pain, as part of a large team, 
defaultof 
defaulttrying desperately to save the life of a fatally-injured cyclist. I believe that the only reason that death rates for cyclists have not climbed recently in London is that the
default centralisation of trauma services in 2010, under Dr Fionna Moore’s leadership, has improved survival for critically-injured Londoners
default1
default.  The injury rates 
defaultfor cyclists 
defaultare constantly climbing. 
defaultThe majority of my colleagues feel unable to cycle to work, be
defaultcause they’re legitimately afraid of being injured. Only the eccentric risk-takers amongst us use our bikes. Children are rarely seen cycling, which helps to explain the
defaultir
default terrifying obesity rates (27% of year 6 primary school children in my borough are ob
defaultese).
default&#xa0;
defaultI believe that the Transport Select Committee already knows exactly the steps which could be taken to reduce injur
defaulties and deaths to cyclists. 
defaultI 
defaultalso 
defaultbelieve that 
defaultboth central and local government are
default lacking the vision to implement them. 
defaultOur roads d
defaulto not cater for cyclists. Almost every cycle lane/ advanced stop line 
defaultin London 
defaulthas been tacked on or put in as an afterthought aiming to somehow let bicycles quietly fit in and filter around “proper” traffic.  This is not good enough, particularly on busy
default roads. The time has come fo
defaultr fully-segregated cycle lanes and junctions designed with cyclists in mind
default. It is obvious that countries which priorit
defaultise safe space for cycling on thei
defaultr roads have lower
default rates of injuries and deaths amongst
default cyclists, despite a
defaultttracting a wider range of people onto their bikes.
default 
defaultOf course, other measures such as tighter HGV controls, better road policing etc could be useful adjuncts to safety, but designing 
defaultspace for 
defaultcycling into our roads is the number one priority.
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease 
defaultals
defaulto 
defaultconsider
default the 
defaultsummary 
defaultreport
default2
default by the All Party Parliamentary Cycling Group
default before you write up your conclusions.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default