&#xa0;
defaultSubmission from Clive MitchelldefaultBackground:- 
defaultTraditional electrical apprenticeship and 32 years in the trade.
defaultIn brief.  I think that the electrical industry has become bloated with red tape and officialdom, while simultaneously being de-skilled to the point 
defaultthat most electrical installation work is now being done by labourers with no proper understanding of the characteristics of electricity.  Most modern electrical certificates are little more than a disclaimer of liability for the training company and emplo
defaultyer.
defaultPart P.  Nothing more than a profitable racket.  Any homeowner should be allowed to do electrical work in their own property without having to pay for the right or be forced to employ someone who may be less skilled than they are.
defaultOne of the most stun
defaultning results of the Part P disaster is that lots of electrically incompetent individuals now believe they are fully certified electricians.
defaultYou also have the ridiculous situation where an industrial electrician
default like myself with 32 years in the electrical in
defaultdustry and a vast electrical/electronic knowledge to match is not allowed to do electrical work in my own house without approval, while a self employed handyman with minimal electrical knowledge is "Part P certified" and can.
defaultSJIB.  Formerly quite a credib
defaultle certifying body.  I can recall how proud I was as an apprentice to receive my grade card (with no expiry/renewal date at that time).  Now it's just another organisation cashing in on short duration certificates
default that you have to renew regularly while also
default doing patronising safety tests at further expense.  Their whole grading system is now full of watered down sub-grades to pander to the new era of de-skilling industry.
defaultNICEIC.    In my personal opinion the NICEIC is a private, profit making organisation t
defaulthat presented itself as a standards agency and used heavy marketing to imply that only organisations it approved should be used to do electrical work.  Add the catch-22 situation that anyone applying for approval had to have been trading for 2 years (hard 
defaultwhen you can't get work because you're not approved by them) and a requirement that you had "proper" industrial trading premises (hard when you're just starting out as self employed) and you actually have a protection racket that served large contractors b
defaulty making it hard for newly formed companies to start business.  I know this because I applied for approval when I went self employed about twenty years ago and was forced to become a freelance 
defaultelectrican
default instead for those very reasons.   Of course, now the
defaulty'll approve anyone who provides suitable certification (a cheque) and does one of the lucrative "instant electrician" courses.
defaultThe "one competent person per company" has been shockingly abused by generic construction and facility management companies who 
defaultquite literally have just one electrically competent person.  Their role appears to be to try and clean up the mess left by the incompetent persons.
defaultMeter calibration.  There is absolutely no need for test equipment to be calibrated every single year.  The
default requirement of certification of calibration on test certificates has turned this into yet another expensive racket.  Domestic and industrial wiring does not require military precision.  If 
defaulta meter drifts by a few percent on its ohm or 
defaultmegohm
default ranges then i
defaultt is still perfectly usable to get an accurate reading.  Most meters will not drift by more than one percent over their entire lifespan unless misused severely, and this could be tested by the commonly available "proving box" that simply contains two high 
defaultprecision resistors as reference.  An alternative to yearly calibration could be for testers to use the proving box before each set of tests and write the measured values in a designated space.
defaultThis is just the tip of the iceberg.  The whole construction i
defaultndustry is plagued by wall after wall of red tape and short expiry date certification.  You may wish to explore the following.
defaultIPAF:-  A "driving licence" for site access equipment like 
defaultcherrypickers
default and scissor lifts that expires every five years  (used t
defaulto be three) requiring expensive renewal.  Does your car driving licence expire every five years?  No it doesn't, and I don't think you'd be thrilled if you had to 
defaultresit
default your driving test every five years either.  Particularly when a car is infinitely more 
defaultdangerous and complicated than a cherry picker
default.
defaultPASMA:- A scaffold building "licence" that also expires every five years and requires expensive renewal.  No licence means no work.  That's yet another racket.
defaultCSCS safety test:- An exciting multiple choice sa
defaultfety test that is required to gain access to construction sites.  Of course, it expires every five years and you have to pay to do it again.  It's composed of patronising safety questions along the lines of
default "Your mate falls from a great height onto his he
defaultad and bleeds heavily." 
defaultDo you:-
defaultA.  Call for medical attention.
defaultB.  Slap him repeatedly while shouting "wake up".
defaultC.  Run away.
defaultD.  Fetch him a nice hot cup of tea.
default(Seriously.  That's the level of many of the questions.)
defaultThis is backed up by unbelievabl
defaulty nonsensical on-site health and safety regulations that turn even the simplest task into a chore.  And to even start on any site involves signing blanket disclaimers of liability.  Perhaps this is also largely down to the seemingly uncontrolled litigation
default industry that actively 
defaultencouarges
default people to raise fatuous legal actions.
defaultSorry.  I'll stop ranting now.  It's tough when the trade you once loved is run into the ground for profit by the 
defaulttradeless
default.
default&#xa0;
default28 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default