&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from t
defaulthe Association of Democratic Services Officers
default (LTD0002)
defaultThe Association of Democratic Services Officers (ADSO) is the professional body which represents all staff who work within Democratic Services 
defaultwithin local authorities encompassing councillor support, executive, area committees and scrutiny. We currently have over 900 members who work across 220 Local Authorities. The Association's aim is to provide a voice, guidance and best practice for the sec
defaulttor, as well as professional development and qualifications for those who work within democracy roles within local government.
defaultOne of our primary roles is to provide advice and guidance to government and partner organisations on governance issues particula
defaultrly where they impact on local authority decision making.
defaultIn terms of the Select Committee's current work it is in the area of decision making on transport expenditure that ADSO would be particularly interested.
defaultWhen the Department of Transport initially p
defaultublished 
defaultits
default proposals to devolve decisions on local transport funding to LEP's or Local Transport Boards ADSO did have some concerns about how well this proposal fitted with the current governance arrangements that existed within local authorities. There 
defaultappeared to be little recognition of the executive arrangements that existed or how the decision making powers of local authority leaders could be delegated 
defaultwithin existing legislation 
defaultto external partner organisations such as the LEP or the local transpor
defaultt board.  We now know that quite a few local authorities have created combined authorities in effect to overcome this issue.
defaultHowever for those councils not in a position or not wishing to go down this route there appears to remain a legislative gap between
default the ability of local authorities to make decisions on local transport funding and the bodies (the LEP or the LTB) to which responsibility has been delegated. None of the required legislative processes for local authority decision making around transparenc
defaulty, scrutiny and accessibility appear to be replicated within the processes for the LEP and LTBs on transport schemes.
defaultThe concern remains therefore that should a decision be taken to pursue or not to pursue a particular local transport scheme then should t
defaulthat decision be judicially reviewed, the legislative gap referred to above could expose the frailty of the decision making processes put in place by local authorities based on inadequate advice and guidance from the Department of Transport.
defaultIn ADSO's view 
defaulttherefore further detailed work needs to be undertaken to ensure this legislative gap is filled.  
defaultADSO would be very willing to assist with this work.
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default