Written evidence submitted by The Law Society (JRR 0029)default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThis paper is divided into 3 sections.  First, we 
defaultprovide 
defaultan overview of our concerns regarding the 
defaultGovernment’s proposed judicial review reforms
default, next we 
defaultrespond to the specific list of issues 
defaultreferred to 
defaultin the Joint Committee on Human R
defaultights’ (JCHR) call for evidence
default.
default 
defaultThirdly
default, we make some concluding comments.
default&#xa0;
default1.0
default              
defaultThe Law Society is concerned by the latest set of proposals from the Government for changes to judicial review.  The right of the ordinary citizen to challenge the decision of a public body is fundamental to the concepts of civil society and the rule of la
defaultw.  It is essential 
defaultthat 
defaultthere 
defaultshould 
defaultbe a
defaultn effective
default legal right of protection against arbitrary or unlawful decisions by public bodies.  Judicial review has been developed by the courts as the functions of the state have expanded into every aspect of peo
defaultple’s lives.  
default1.1
default              
defaultIt may be inconvenient and time consuming for the decisions of public authorities to be susceptible to legal challenge.  However, if the right to judicial review is reduced 
defaultit is likely that 
defaultin the long term 
defaulteveryone will suffer
default as
default 
defaultd
defaultecision makers 
defaultcould 
defaultbecome less accountable and more 
defaultcareless
default in their actions.  The ordinary citizen will have less scope for seeking redress for wrongs which they may have suffered at the hands of public bodies.  
defaultAs a consequence p
defaultublic trust in authori
defaultty will in time be undermined.  
default1.2
default              
defaultCivi
defaultl
default society has to be founded on checks and balances.  At present
default,
default judicial review is the principal restraint on 
defaultunlawful 
defaultstate 
defaultaction 
defaultin 
defaultthe United Kingdom
default.  The erosion of the right to judicial review 
defaultwould 
defaultbe regre
defaulttt
defaultable
default.  The full consequences will take considerable time to emerge
default and 
defaultas 
defaulta 
defaultresult,
default no 
defaultchanges should be adopted 
defaultwithout significant consideration
default.
default1.3
default              
defaultThere are two key proposals in the Ministry of Justice consultation 
defaultJudicial review – proposals for fu
defaultrther reform 
defaultwhich will impact on recourse to judicial review.  Proposals to narrow the standing of applicants are likely to reduce legal challenges.  Proposals to limit legal aid payment to judicial review cases which receive permission to be heard
default,
default are l
defaultikely both to reduce the 
defaultability 
defaultof lawyers to undertake cases and 
defaultalso 
defaultdeter members of the public from applying for judicial review.
default1.4
default              
defaultThe proposals 
defaultproceed from a fundamental misunderstanding of the nature of the judicial review remedy.  Although 
defaultclaims may be brought only by a person with a “sufficient interest” in the matter at issue, it is wrong to equate judicial review claims to private law claims.  Judicial review is a means of correcting public law wrongs rather than simply asserting private
default law rights.  Indeed, the discretionary nature of the remedy – of which the Government no doubt approves – is as much a ref
defaultlection of the public interest nature of the jurisdiction as are the rules of standing and third party intervention which the Governm
defaultent seeks to curtail.  
default2.0
default              
defaultThis section responds to some of the issues and cases mentioned in the JCHR’s call for evidence
default. 
default2.1
default              
defaultThe Law Society 
defaultopposes 
defaultthe case for a
defaultltering the test for judicial review.  
defaultThe Government maintains that too many cases are b
defaulte
defaulting brought by claimants with little or no direct interest in the matter.  
defaultThe Government
default’
defaults 
defaultproposed 
defaultremedy is to legislate to alter the test for standing, requiring 
defaultclaimants to show a more direct interest in the matter.  The Government appears to be committed to this course in principle.  The consultation focuses on the options for an appropriate new definition for standing.
default2.1.1
default              
defaultThe Law Society believes that t
defaulthere 
defaultis no need to alter the test for standing.  The permission stage already acts as a filter mechanism, weeding out applicants 
defaultwho 
defaultare considered "timewasters" or "busybodies"
default.  
defaultThis 
defaultinvolves an assessment by the judge of whether the applicant has sufficient 
defaultinterest
default;
default a process which is not automatic.  
default2.1.2
default              
defaultAltering the test for standing appears to be designed to restrict the scope for non governmental bodies and charities to pursue an issue in the courts as they would have to demonstrate a direct interest i
defaultn the proceedings in order to be able to apply for judicial review.  NGOs and charities perform an invaluable service in taking up issues which affect groups of people rather than individuals.  In their absence it is likely that unlawful decisions will go 
defaultunchallenged.
default  The two cases cited in the consultation paper – 
defaultMaya Evans
default 
defaultand 
defaultWorld Development Movement
default, are both cases where no individual claimant was available to challenge decisions or practices that the court found to be unlawful.  In a later case,
default Maya Evans was denied standing because an affected individual was also bringing a claim.  In the 
defaultWorld Development 
defaultMovement
default case, 
defaultit would have been unrealistic to expect an affected individual – and it is worth noting that any such potential claimant wou
defaultld in future be denied legal aid for non-compliance with the UK residence test that the Lord Chancellor proposes to introduce early next year.  
default2.1.3
default              
defaultThe consultation paper notes that challenges brought by public interest claimants are significantly more 
defaultsuccessful than those brought by individuals.  R
defaultestricting standing 
defaultis 
defaultlikely to 
defaultreduce the number of such claims and increase the number of cases where unlawful action by public authorities goes unchallenged.  Combined with 
defaultthe reduction in legal aid, it 
defaultwill mean that those with standing will not have the resources to litigate while those with the resources will not have the standing. 
default2.1.4
default              
defaultThe Government is also proposing to modify the rules to discourage interveners and third parties in judicial review
default cases.  In reality 
defaultinterveners 
defaultperform a valuable role in assisting the court with additional information and the broader perspective
default.  They are often able to represent the interests of the wider community
default 
defaultin addressing issues of public concern
default. F
defaultor examp
defaultle 
default- 
defaultcharity groups for disabled 
defaultpeople 
defaultchallenging welfare changes.  Preventing such groups participating in judicial review cases 
defaultwould  
defaultbe to the detriment of 
defaultcivil 
defaultsociety.  It will prevent the voice of those least able to represent themselves under th
defaulte law from being heard.
default  It is to be noted that Government departments frequently intervene in judicial review claims to put forward the interests of their department.  
default2.1.5
default              
defaultThe introduction of a costs risk for third party interveners will effectively cu
defaultrtail such interventions, since hard-pressed charities and NGOs will be deterred from intervening by the risk that an application for costs might be made against them.  The courts are able to control the scope of third party interventions without the need 
defaultfor this additional power.  
default2.2
default              
defaultThe Law Society 
defaultopposes the proposal to make legal aid payment for bringing a judicial review claim dependent on the grant of permission (with a residual discretion in the Legal Aid Agency 
default(LAA) 
defaultin cases settled befo
defaultre 
defaultpermission).  The Society 
defaultrejects the Government’s assertion that “it is appropriate for all of the financial risk of the permission application to rest with the provider [lawyer]”.  It is not the responsibility of lawyers to underwrite members of the public seeking redress for fau
defaultlty decision making by public bodies.    
default2.2.1
default              
defaultThis 
defaultpotential 
defaultfin
defaultancial penalty is 
defaultcalculated to
default deter lawyers and members of the public from challenging public bodies.  
defaultIf this proposal is adopted, 
defaulta likely consequence is that 
defaultlawyers 
defaultwill 
defaultfeel 
defaultunable to
default assume the risk of 
defaultnot being paid at all for the very substantial work involved in 
defaultbringing legitimate cases to court
default.  Members of the public deprived of legal advice from lawyers (and legal assistance from NGOs and charities if the test for standing is a
defaultdopted) will confront the stark choice of trying to bring cases to court in person or letting a matter drop.  In practice either option will mean that individual’s access to justice has been significantly eroded.
default2.2.2
default              
defaultThe damaging effect of the proposal c
defaultannot be offset by the 
defaultproposal 
defaultthat in exceptional cases of general public interest the Legal Aid Agency has the discretion to award legal aid funding.  
defaultIt does not deal with cases settled between refusal and renewal of the permission application.  Furthe
defaultr, experience of the practice of the LAA and the
default 
defaultLegal Services Commission
default 
default(
defaultLSC
default)
default leads us to believe that the discretion will be exercised sparingly and slowly.  
default2.2.3
default              
defaultThe development of Protective Costs Orders 
default(PCO) 
defaultin public law cases has been beneficia
defaultl in 
defaultensuring that public law wrongs are effectively challenged
default.  They have 
defaultpublic interest challengers to 
defaultbring before the courts serious issues that the public interest requires should be litigated.  The conditions governing PCOs are tightly controlled a
defaultnd ensure that frivolous or trivial claims are filtered out.  
defaultAny restrictions on the availability of PCOs 
defaultare 
default likely to have the effect of deterring claims being brought which are in the public interest.
default2.3
default              
defaultThe Law Society agrees that minor defects which would have made no difference to the outcome should not necessitate an authority to revisit its decision.  
defaultThat is the current law.  
defaultHowever, t
defaulthe Law Society object
defaults
default 
defaulton practical grounds 
defaultto the 
defaultproposal to enable cases to be 
defaultdismissed at the permission stage on the grounds 
defaultof no
default difference.  
defaultThe Law Society believes that i
defaultt would lead to full 
defaultrehearsal 
defaultof the arguments at the permission stage
default and be productive of delay and increased cost
default.  The op
defaulttion of applying a lower test
default -
default that it is highly likely that the outcome would be the same
default - 
default would 
defaultundermine the importance of consultation, public participation in decision-making and procedural fairness, which are important elements of a democratic soc
defaultiety.  
default2.
default5
default              
defaultThe Law Society is concerned that the test remains fundamentally discriminatory and potentially unlawful under English and EU law.
default2.5.1
default              
defaultThe recent MOJ consultation 
defaultJudicial review – proposals for further reform
default omitted to refer to the proposal in the earlier 
defaultTransforming Legal Aid
default consultation paper to impose a 12 months lawful residency requirement for eligibility for civil legal aid. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaultat proposal is clearly intended to restrict access to the courts. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt will have a particular impact on people challenging the decisions of public bodies in relation to asylum and immigration status.
default&#xa0;
default The Government has had to acknowledge the overwhelming c
defaultriticism of the proposal by exempting certain classes of people from the residence test.
default&#xa0;
default Nonetheless the Law Society remains of the view that the introduction of a residency test is not compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights or Common Law
default rights of access to the courts.
default&#xa0;
default It cannot be squared with Article 14 (prohibition of discrimination) when combined with Article 6 (right to a fair trial).
default&#xa0;
default The residency test would discriminate between people in relation to proceedings before the courts 
defaultand for the purposes of legal aid eligibility.
default&#xa0;
default2.6
default              
defaultThe success rate in appeals to the Tribunal against immigration decisions in managed migration ca
defaultses (e.g. those seeking to work or study in the UK lawfully) stands at around 50%. This suggests that 
defaultpreliminary 
defaultdecision-making is poor. Removing the right of appeal in all these cases will mean that the only way to challenge such decisions through an in
defaultdependent judicial process is by way of judicial review. 
default2.6.1
default              
defaultMany such migrants (or potential migrants) would previously have been eligible for legal aid to challenge a negative decision by way of judicial review. Unfortunately the soon-to-be-introduced
default Residence Test will mean that such people are excluded from legal aid. By definition these people will not meet the Residence Test because either they will not be lawfully resident by the time they are able to seek to challenge a negative decision (contin
defaultuing leave under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 will cease once a decision is made on administrative review (clause 11 Immigration Bill 2013)) or they will be outside the UK. Those inside the UK will automatically become 
defaultoverstayers
default at this point a
defaultnd could face criminal sanction despite being the victim of a potentially unlawful decision. The number of people placed in this position will be significant in light of the success rate cited above. 
default2.6.2
default              
defaultMoreover the proposed changes in the Immigration
default Bill
default&#xa0;
defaultwill further limit rights of appeal in immigration cases. This means that many decisions made in managed migration cases will not be able to be judicially challenged as there will be no right of appeal and no legal aid for judicial review. This will 
defaultseverely restrict access to justice for those wishing to lawfully enter or remain in the United Kingdom
default.
default 
default2.7
default              
defaultThe right of the ordinary citizen to challenge the decision of a public body is fundamental to the concepts of civil society a
defaultnd the rule of law.  
default2.7.1
default              
defaultIt is essential that there should be an effective legal right of protection against arbitrary or unlawful decisions by public bodies.
default2.7.2
default              
defaultIn the long term, i
defaultf the right to judicial review is reduced
default, many 
defaultwill suffer.
default2.7.3
default              
defaultThe ordinary citizen will have less scope for seeking redress for wrongs which they may have suffered at the hands of public bodies.  Public trust in authority will in time be undermined.  
default2.7.4
default              
defaultThe proposals proceed from a fundamental misunderstanding of
default the nature of the judicial review remedy. 
defaultNovember 2013
default 
defaultR 
default(on the application of Maya Evans) v Secretary of State for Defence 
default[2010] EWHC 1445. 
default 
default 
defaultWorld Development Movement Ltd 
default[1995] 1 WLR 386 
default 
default