&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence
default f
defaultrom Scottish Public Services Ombudsman 
default[PHS0041]
default&#xa0;
defaultThis
default note is intended to 
defaultprovide some background to the C
defaultommittee in areas where the SPSO remit and power
defaults
default are most different from that of the Parliamentary and Health Services Ombudsman. 
default These relate to the decision of the Scottish Parliament to create a sin
defaultgle Ombudsman and also to a
default new role we have around setting complaints standards 
defaultand designing and imp
defaultlementing standardised procedures 
defaultfor organisations under our jurisdiction. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOurdefault jurisdictiondefaultThe SPSO’s jurisdiction broadly covers devolved and local areas of government and related bodies.  This includes local authorities; prisons; the health service; 
defaultregistered social landlords; the Scottish Government, 
defaultcolleges and u
defaultniversities 
defaultand most Scottish NDPBs.  We can take complaints by private companies providing 
defaultservices on behalf of one of these public sector bodies
default.  We also take complaints about one utility, water. 
default There are exceptions to our remit, there are separate bodies 
defaultin Scotland 
defaultfor complaints about police; information requests; breach of standards 
defaultof specific codes of conduct; 
defaultand social care. 
default 
defaultLast year 
defaultwe received, a little over 4,100 complaints of which 37% were about local authorities and 30% about health. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe “one-stop-shop” conceptdefault and review of complaints defaultThe roots of our broad jurisdiction can be traced back to 
default2002, 
defaultwhen 
defaultthe Scottish Parliament
default endorsed the idea of a “one-stop-shop”. 
defaultT
defaulthe aim was to make it easier for the public 
defaultto access the ombudsman 
defaultand to be able to deal with complaints where more than one
default organisation was involved.  
defaultThis led to the merger of the Scottish parts of the P
defaultarliam
defaultentary and 
defaultH
defaultealth 
defaultS
defaultervices 
defaultO
defaultmbudsman
default, Housing Ombudsman and Local Government Ombudsman.  
defaultThere 
defaulthave been 
defaultadditional 
defaultsignificant 
defaultchanges follow
defaulting
default two reviews of complain
defaultt handling across the Scottish public s
defaultector
default in the last few years
default.  Full details 
defaultof th
defaultese reviews 
defaultcan be found in the Crerar Report
default (2007)
default and the Sinclair Report
default (2009)
default.  Broadly speaking, these
default reports
default called for significant changes in complaints handling by public organisations and simplification of the complaints handling landscape at the next level.  
defaultIt was 
defaultas 
defaulta direct results of these reports that we
default took on a role in relation to prisons and w
defaultater c
defaultomplaints
default and that the bodies previously dealing with complaints in these areas were abolished
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs an organisation with a broad jurisdiction we need to ensure we can bring the benefits of being a 
default“
defaultone-stop-shop
default”
default in terms of ease of access; consistency of 
defaultapproach and learning across the sector with the requirements to understand the diverse range of public services.  
defaultWhen taking on new jurisdictions we have set up small teams of staff who specialise in those complaints for a period to build up our internal
default knowledge and only moved to integrating them with our mainstream process when we believe we have sufficient 
defaultexperience and expertise to do so.  We also have a bank of specialists advisers we can draw on when we need to supplement our knowledge. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Compdefaultlaints Standards AuthoritydefaultThe other statutory change to our remit
default as a result of these reviews was that we took on a new role in 
default2010
default.  
defaultThis role gives us specific powers and imposing duties on organisations under our jurisdiction around complaint standar
defaultds.  
default&#xa0;
defaultIn line with the new legislation we underto
defaultok a public consultation on
default principles of complaints
default handling and
default seven
default complaint handling principles were 
defaultapproved by 
defaultthe 
defaultScottish Parliament in January 2011
default.  
defaultAll organisations under our jurisdiction are
default required to comply with these principles.  The legislation also encouraged us to create standard
defaultised
default complaint handling procedures 
defaultwhich meet these principles.  We can require organisations under o
defaultur jurisdiction to implement the
defaultse procedures. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWorking i
defaultn partnership we have led a programme of reform 
default 
defaultto 
defaultdevelop a 
defaultstandardised 
defaultmodel complaint
defaults
default handling procedure for each sector
default 
defaultunder our jurisdiction 
defaultwhich 
defaultit 
defaultis 
defaultnow 
defaulta statutory requirement for bodies to adopt. 
default 
defaultThe
defaultre are
default currently
default 
defaultstandardised
default 
defaultprocedures 
defaultin place for
default all local authorities, 
defaultr
defaultegistere
defaultd 
defaults
defaultocial 
defaultl
defaultandlords
default,
default 
defaultc
defaultolleges
default,
default 
defaultu
defaultniversities and the Scottish Government and 
defaultGovernment sponsored
default 
defaultagencies and other public authorities
default.  They 
defaultall follow the same simple model
default process
default.  A quick, frontline resolution stage which should normally be completed 
defaultwithin
default five working days and a single investigation stage with a target response time of 20 working days.  
defaultAlongside that simple process, there are requirements for organisations to 
defaultlog, monitor and learn from 
defaultall 
defaultcomplaints
default.  
defaultWhile very similar, the mo
defaultdel for each sector does take into account
default specific issues that reflect the individual needs of each sector and there is room for local flexibility
default, not in terms of the process and stan
defaultdards the public receive, but in how their organisations meets these
default.  This is another example of the way we need to balance being a single Ombudsman with the need to reflect 
defaultand respect 
defaultlocal conditions.  
default&#xa0;
defaultWhile there were some initial concerns from orga
defaultnisations
default in implementing this new model
default, particularly those for whom this would be a significant change, there are now hundreds of organisations across Scotland operating this model and organisations are increasingly reporting that they are finding the ne
defaultw model is 
defaultacting as a cultural catalyst not only in relation to their complaints handling but in 
defaultimprov
defaulting their wider approach to customer service
default. 
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe CSA 
defaultalso provides 
defaultsupport 
defaultto 
defaultorganisations using the model.  They 
defaulthave established complaints handl
defaulters networks for the
default 
defaultsectors to
default help
default share best practice 
defaultand
default 
defaultlearning from complaints
default and to benchmark performance
default.  
defaultWe have 
defaultdevelop
defaulted standardised 
default performance indicators 
defaultfor each sector which they will be required to publish meaning that, for the first 
defaulttime, the public will have access to consistent detailed information about complaints at a local level and organisations will be able to compare and benchmark against each other
default on the basis of consistent detailed information
default.  
defaultWe are not seeking to 
defaultbecome
default a regulator but 
defaulthave worked with regulators who now 
defaulthave access to 
defaultcomplaints data 
defaultin the course of their
default regulation and inspection
default activities
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is worth noting that the complaints process for the Health Service 
defaultin Scotland 
defaultis set out in separate leg
defaultislation and regulations.  The process consists of a single investigation stage of 20 working days and this was used as the basis for the other sectors to mean that, as far as possible, anyone complaining to any public organisation in Scotland should meet 
defaultsimilar standards
default and procedures
default.  This should also make it easier for organisations working together to deliver services to co-ordinate their responses to any concerns. 
default&#xa0;defaultMaking 
defaultthe process easier and recording
default and  monitoring complaints is o
defaultnly the start of the process.  The process is 
default also designed to help staff in public organisations focus less on the process and more on responding well.  The
defaultre is a strong emphasis 
defaultin the procedures 
defaulton empowering 
defaultall 
defaultfront-line staff to resolve problems 
defaulta
defaults close to the frontline as possible. T
defaulthe
default CSA 
defaultalso seeks to share
default good practice and has 
defaultestablished 
defaultforums for complaint handlers
default to meet to discuss improvements and common issues.  Additional support is given by our training unit. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe SPSO Training Unitdefault defaultTh
defaulte SPSO training unit predated the reviews and
default was created in 
defaultresponse to requests from organisations 
defaultin our jurisdiction 
defaultfor help and 
defaultwas initially influenced by a similar unit at the Local Government Ombudsman.  
defaultThis has since evolved considerably as 
defaultrequests 
defaultfor training increased following the Sinclair report in 2009 which recommended that public organisations invest in training for staff and also that the status of complaint handlers be improved within organisations.  
defaultWhen the 
defaultmodel 
defaultprocedures were 
defaultdeveloped there were 
defaultfurther requests for us to 
defaultsupport the process with good complaint handling skills
default training
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOur website SPSO 
defaultT
defaultraining
default now hosts several e-learning modules.  These are free t
defaulto members of staff in the organisations
default under our jurisdic
defaulttion. 
default The modules
default currently available on the site are desi
defaultgned for front-line staff
default to help them understand their role and emphasise the benefits of resolving complaints quickly
default. 
default We have had 2,5
default00 staff sign up direct through our own website and know org
defaultanisations who have chosen to directly host the e-learning on their own internal websites have signed up many more. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe 
defaultalso deliver direct training for staff who unde
defaultrtake the investigation stage
default and in 2012/13 
defaultdelive
defaultre
defaultd
default 71 courses
default.  
default We are currently wo
defaultrking closely with NHS Education Scotland 
default(NES) 
defaultand 
defaulte-learning 
defaulttraining for frontline NHS staff launched in
default May 2013
default.  We are 
defaultproviding 
default training
default direct
default to GP practice managers 
defaultalongside
default NES and expect to have an investigation skills training e-learning mo
defaultdule 
defaultfor NHS staff 
defaultavailable early next year.  
defaultOur e-learning modules have attracted considerable interest and we have had requests from organisations outside our jurisdiction to access these, including some international contacts
default to use them
default. 
default To give an 
defaultexample, w
defaulte have had a direct request from a local authority in New Zealand
default.
default 
default We know NHS England have considered our modules as they look to develop their own approach. 
default&#xa0;defaultWhile we do not charge for e-learning 
defaultwe do for direct delivery
default training and do so on a cost-recovery basis.  
defaultWe sought and received
default Scottish Government 
defaultfunding 
defaultfor the technical side of the e-learning and the NHS have funded their own e-learning. 
default&#xa0;
defaultLooking ahead defaultThere is currently an impetus around complaints handli
defaultng as a result of the 
defaultreviews, and the implementation of the new models.  
defaultHowever, culture change and leadership remain the most significant factors in improving complaints handling.  
defaultWhile
default tr
defaultaining seeks to support this,
default 
defaultI have 
defaultalso 
defaultbeen meeting Chief Exe
defaultcutives and others to encourage 
defaultgreater visibility 
defaultand reporting 
defaultand 
defaultprovide 
defaultadditional guidance and support for the way governance structures 
defaultacross the public services 
defaultshould be responding to complaints.  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.scotland.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/82980/0053065.pdf
defaultHttp://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Government/PublicServiceReform/IndependentReviewofReg/ActionGroups/ReporttoMinisters
default  
default 
defaulthttp://www.valuingcomplaints.org.uk/wp-content/media/principles.pdf
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.spsotraining.org.uk/
default