&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Professor Michael J Kelly FRS defaultFREngdefault (IPC0013)default1.
default              
defaultIn 1868, 
defaultthe economist 
defaultWilliam Stanley Jevons FRS published ‘The Coal Question’.
default  He was the Lord Stern PBA of his day.
default  
defaultHe
default noted th
defaultat Britain was 
defaultaddicted to coal.  His main message was
default 
defaultit should abandon the industrial revolution forthwith, as the future social collapse when the coal ran out (i.e. about now) would be too horrible to contemplate.  He was ignored
default and correctly so
default: alternatives to coal
default (
defaulti.e. oil and gas) were discovered as were much greater reserves of coal.  Arguably the world is a much better place for most people today compared with their great-grandparents in terms of the adequacy and variety of food, the quality and warmth of homes
default and the access to healthcare, education and transport.
default 
default  The IPCC 
defaultis using the science in AR5 to make
default similar claims today in the context of carbon dioxide emissions
default versus human progress
default as I now show.
default2.
default              
defaultThe difference between living in 1800 and now is 
defaultthat each person in a developed country now uses about 
defaultsix
default-seven
default times as much energy per person per day.  Indeed using the per capita consumption of energy in 1800 as a unit, today we use approximately one unit on personal mobility on land, 
defaultnearly 
defaultanother
default unit on mobility by air and sea, and three units on the manufacture and distribution of all that we buy.  We still use a comparable amount of energy in heating a main room of our house, sourcing local produce and tools as we did 200 years ago.
default   
defaultNearly
default al
defaultl
default this improvement in the living standards of 
defaultthe 
defaultseven times as many people on earth as in 1800 has been and continues to be possible 
defaultwith
default the use of fossil fuels as the source of the extra energy.  Only of order 15% comes from biomass (i.e. using wood as
default a fuel as throughout history
default)
default, nuclear and hydropower
default,
default and 
defaultonly 
defaulta negligible (&lt;1%) amount from renewable energy.
default    Any recommendation to reduce carbon emissions by 80% without a
default readily available and
default 
defaultmature 
defaultnon-carbon
default 
defaultso
defaulturce of energy is actually 
defaultmore pe
defaultrverse
default now
default than the recommendation of Jevons
default in 1868
default.
default3
default.
default              
defaultThe strength of the IPCC case that the world should severely curtail its carbon emissions
default in short order
default should be tensioned against other practical considerations.
default4
default.
default              
defaultEmpirical studies of the global
default climate during the 20
defaultth
default century all 
defaultsuggest
default another century like the last and a
defaultnother
default temperature rise of order 1C.  It is only the computer models that produce the higher temperatures
default and the alarm
default.  In
default the IPCC’s 
defaultARC, the 
defaultconsensus
default rate of increase in temperature since 1950 has been revised down by a factor of two to a value of 0.1C/decade in agreement with the empirical results.  The computer models are acknowledged to have been predicting at least twice as much temperature rise as
default observed over the last 25 years, and
default they
default have not predicted the present 
defaulttemperature 
defaultstatis
default when the empirical models did, pointing 
defaultto
default the repeated plateaux/falls starting in 1880, 1940 and now 2000.  If the present temperature 
defaultstatis
default continues for anothe
defaultr decade 
defaultor more, 
defaultas the empirical models predict
default,
default then the climate models are 
defaultdemonstrably and 
defaultseriously deficient as tools to predict the future.  Should another downward reduction
default in the rate of global warming
default be needed in
default the near
default future
default to accord with
default real-world data
default, the whole edifice of ‘unmanaged man-made’ climate change will be seen as a hollow scare as based on our 
defaultlimited 
defaultpresent scientific 
defaultunderstanding, and 
defaultany 
defaultpotential downsides will be centuries away with ample time for technological fixes.
default 
default In the terms of a ‘risk’ analysis, the amount we should be willing to pay in any form of insuranc
defaulte premium should be coming down as a consequence of AR5.
default5.
default              
defaultAt the
default recent
default 2-day meeting at the Royal Society entitled ‘Next Steps in Climate Science – the nex
defaultt steps’ I got one of the key speakers Professor 
defaultJochem
default 
defaultMarotzke
default of
default Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, Germany
default to admit that he fully expected an upturn in the globally averaged temperature before 2020 on the basis of his models.  I was perturbed when 
defaulth
defaulte was
default cautioned that he was making himself a hostage to fortune.   In mainstream science that happens all the time, and it precisely the test of prediction against data that is the test of a theory.  The more general understanding is that most scientists w
defaultould query the integrity and fitness-for-purpose of all of the models if they continue to miss the present hiatus should it continue for a period of 25 years.
default6
default.
default              
defaultIf we do spend trillions of pounds globally at redirecting human living and 
defaultintroduce 
defaulta non-ca
defaultrbon energy future, just what impact will it have on the future climate?  
default Can we be sure that higher temperatures will actually be avoided?  If not
default,
default the money spent on mitigation as opposed to adaption
default would have been largely wasted in terms of opportunit
defaulties foregone to improve the human condition.  Is the science able to reassure us that mitigation really is value for money?
default7
default.
default              
defaultHow sure are we that higher temperatures really will be as bad as made out?  The temperature rise to date has coincided with impr
defaultovements in the human condition.  How robust is the case that this will turn sour in the future?
default  Over geological times there have been wider excursions in temperature and we are in what is historically a cold but interglacial period now.
default8
default.
default              
defaultIf after all t
defaulthe analysis, the elimination of carbon dioxide emissions must be accelerated
default (a stage I am not convinced we have reached by any means)
default, then we must tackle the challenge in a way that is likely to succeed, and not repeat the 
defaultnonsenses
default of recent decades whi
defaultch manifestly are not
default succeeding 
defaultand will not 
defaultsucceed to 
defaultdo the job.
default9
default.
default              
defaultThe rush, in response to the 1970s oil crises
default,
default to install windmills and solar panels over square kilometres of the Mojave Desert 
defaultin California 
defaultin the 1980s should be a lesson to us now
default.  
defaultThey can be seen by 
defaultgoogling
default ‘abandoned windmills’ of ‘abandoned solar farms’.  
defaultOnce subsidies stopped, they did not produce enough electricity to pay for the
defaultir
default maintenance.  
defaultI am not persuaded that
default the renewable tec
defaulth
defaultnologies 
defaultare 
defaultsufficiently more matur
defaulte, robust and economic 
defaultnow than they were 30 years ago.  
default10
default.
default              
defaultRenewable energy sources are intrinsically dilute at source.  One needs all 1000 square kilometres of the Fen Country (now producing food) to generate 
default0.8-1
defaultGW from biomass if we harvested and 
defaultburned 
defaultmiscanthus
default,
default a rapidly growing grass.  We already get 1.3GW from Sizewell B, the actual 
defaultnuclear 
defaultplant 
defaultfor 
defaultwhich is less than one tenth of a square kilometre in area.  The factor of 10,000 in 
defaultenergy 
defaultefficiency of the use of land is not something that 
defaultcan be closed by tinkerin
defaultg with the renewable energy
default efficiency
default.   Furthermor
defaulte 
defaultone 
defaultcan grow food or 
defaultmiscanthus
default or cover the land with solar panels, but not do more than one of these
default with the land at any one time
default.
default1
default1
default.
default              
defaultIn 2050 most of the 9B population of th
defaulte earth will live in megacities.  O
defaultnly nuclear energy and the burning of fossil fuels with 
defaultcomplete 
defaultcarbon capture and storage produce 
defaultenergy 
defaultnumbers that add up 
defaultto make global sense, b
defaultut the latter technology (i.e. capture and storage) has not been demons
defaulttrated as effective and safe at anything like the scale needed.    Everything else
default, and especially renewable energy technologies,
default is hubris as 
defaultfar
default as energising megacities is concerned.
default1
default2
default.
default              
defaultBusiness
default as usual is already striving for sustainability as a matt
defaulter of 
defaultgood 
defaultcommercial sense – witness the myriad bulky devices of 20 years ago that are now in a smart phone in the palm of one’s hand.  The case for drastic deployment of immature and uneconomic 
defaultenergy 
defaulttechnologies is not made, and is 
defaultactually 
defaultmaking matt
defaulters worse in terms of both carbon emission
default increases
default and economic disrup
defaulttion where it has been deployed 
defaultas 
defaulthere in the EU in particular.
default1
default3
default. 
default              
defaultAny policies that weaken economies will make matters worse and delay any changes that would 
defaultameliorate environment
defaultal damage
default.  It was the strength of the UK economy, and not its weakness, that allowed London and other cities to be cleaned up in the 1960s.  The same process will happen in
default the cities of
default China in due course.
default1
default4
default.
default              
defaultMuch less panic by way of response is calle
defaultd for even if the worst of the IPCC predictions came to pass, but it is 
defaultmuch less likely
default that they will, given the scale-back buried in several places in the IPCC 5
defaultth
default assessment
default of the mean climate sensitivities.
default15.
default              
defaultThe most serious defect of the IPCC 5
defaultth
default assessment report, as published, was the 
defaulttruculent and 
defaultobfuscatory
default manner with which it admitted the temperature 
defaultstatis
default since 1996, halved its estimate of the rate of global warming over the last 60 years, and when insisting that it was more certain than 
defaultever that man was playing a role, that that role is still small in the context of the last 150 years of climate change.  A scientific report written by neutral consultants would have been much more upfront, yes, and honest, about these facts.
default16.
default              
defaultFinally, 
defaultgiven that the Climate Change Act has the force of law, I would like to see a clearest possible statement of the legal consequences of the implementation of this Act going wrong: who takes legal responsibility if it proves that the expenditure in pursuit o
defaultf the Climate Chang
defaulte Act is shown to be ineffective, 
defaultunnecessary
default or counterproductive?
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default