&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence from Simon Gerry [CEP0005]default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefault1.
default              
defaultI just wanted to put forward a few thoughts relating to the pay of Chief Executives in Charities.  I joined the charity sector 6 years ago following a career in the military and a post in the Ministry of Defence 
defaultrelating to specifically to pay and pensions.
default I am currently the CEO of a medium sized charity in the education sector.
defaultSummarydefault2.
default              
defaultTwo key messages:
defaultThoughtsdefault3.
default              
defaultThere has been a lot in the press recently about CEO/Senior Manager pay and the possible introduction of some kind of capped or ratio formula based upon the minimum pay grade and the maximum pay grade.  Whilst I am v
defaultery conscious of the pressures facing many people in relatively low paid roles and the subsequent public concern about how funds in all organisations are expended care needs to be taken to ensure that charities remain strong, well led and effectively gover
defaultned.
default5.
default              
defaultThere has been an evident improvement across the charity sector in terms of governance leadership and going about things in a much more business- like fashion, and this is because leaders with the correct skills, values and attitudes have been attr
defaultacted to the sector.  As a consequence the overall social impact created has increased and the sector is very well placed to help face the challenges of delivering more for less over the coming years.
default6.
default              
defaultWhat I have learnt since
default being in the sector is that
default the charity sector is too diverse to apply consistent rules to in terms of pay
default, and from experience politicians in Whitehall don’t seem to recognise the complexities involved.
default  
default 
defaultPay should be determined in line with the 
defaultresponsibilities undertaken and the
default 
defaultmarket need and cannot be capped or related to a maximum v minimum ratio.  This would not take into account the management of resources or people, whether that be public or donated funds
default,
default or they be staff or volunteers.  You may have a relatively small st
defaultaff base but a lot of responsibility in awarding legacy grants or funding, or you may have a relatively small income but be managing thousands of volunteers.  Whilst in 
defaultthe 
defaultprivate sector comparing the salaries of two major banking CEOs, or in the public s
defaultector those of two local council CEOs similar comparators can be found, this would be much more difficult in the charity sector.  I also believe that if you did look at the very big national charities (and I am not in that bracket, nor likely to be) the re
defaultsponsibility of the CEO and the salary granted would be well below that of their comparators in the private sector
default with similar responsibilities
default, and more than likely less than the public sector.
default7.
default              
defaultIn essence, my message is that if the public wanted to st
defaultop donating to a particular charity because of a highly paid CEO then they could do so and that is their choice; ultimately as an extreme example the charity may reduce in size 
defaultas a result 
defaultand the 
defaultCEO 
defaultpay reduced accordingly as there would be less to manag
defaulte
default and less responsibility
default!  
defaultWhen looking at charities that provide public services, the salaries are always likely to be less than private providers who are also considered to commission the contracts awarded.
default8
default.
default              
defaultACEVO do some good 
defaultresearch
default on pay and this
default informs many pay and remuneration committees; certainly my Board consider their findings
default as well as other similar organisations to ours
default when reviewing my own remuneration and that is rightly so.  As long as the reporting requirements ensure that pay conti
defaultnues to be transparent then it should be left alone.  To artificially cap pay could lead to an exodus of some very talented people doing some very good work in the sector, and that would be detrimental to the charities themselves, and the overall economy i
defaultf the skills to maximise social good are not retained.
default  
defaultI urge the committee to l
defaulteave the Boards of charities to determine the pay of CEOs; they are the best informed and best placed to make informed decisions
default, and have legal responsibilities to act pruden
defaulttly and in the interests of the charity
default.
default&#xa0;defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default