&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Professor Narinder Kapur (GMC0007)defaultExecutive SummarydefaultI am a Professor of Psychology and I have a number of suggestions for greater fairness and transparency in GMC procedures and processes.
defaultBackgrounddefault1.1default This evidence is submitted by me in my personal capacity. I am visiting Professor of Neuropsychology at University College London. I also work as a consultant neuropsychologist at Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust (Charing Cross Hospital). I have published papers on clinical excellence, patient safety and on the Francis Report into Mid-Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust.
default1.2default Over the past two years, I have had direct or indirect dealings with the General Medical Council (GMC) in respect of doctors who have been reported to the GMC or who were in the process of being reported to the GMC. I attend meetings of the British Association of Physicians of Indian Origin, the British International Doctors Association, the Doctors Support Group, and the organization 
defaultPatientsFirst
default. At these meetings, GMC issues have been discussed, and at one of the meetings Niall Dickson, GMC Chief Executive, spoke.
default1.3default I have a number of suggestions with regards to how the GMC operates that I hope will allow for a fairer process, save expenditure and result in less stress to doctors and to others who have been implicated in GMC hearings.
defaultSuggestionsdefault2.1default In June 2007, the GMC received from Kings College London an external audit which the GMC had commissioned of decisions in the investigation stage of its fitness to practice case. Such an external audit should become an annual feature of the work of the GMC. This audit should include a scrutiny as to whether some doctors, such as medical directors or senior consultants, get off leniently when they are referred to the GMC, as opposed to junior doctors or newly appointed consultants.
default2.2default If a complaint against a doctor is closed by the GMC at its initial screening stage, a recourse to appeal is via Rule 12 of the GMC Rules. It would appear that this recourse to appeal is not indicated in ‘refusal to investigate’ decision letters to complainants from the GMC. This should be rectified, such that all complainants whose complaints are not taken forward are given this information regarding the Rule 12 appeal process.
default2.3default The Rule 12 appeal process appears to be entirely an internal matter, and could be seen as a case of 
default‘the
default police investigating the police’. To ensure that fairness is done and seen to be done, some independent element should form part of the Rule 12 review. Thus, for example, an external consultant should be asked to scrutinise the relevant evidence and offer his / her opinion. 
default2.4default In view of the possible unfairness of the Rule 12 appeal process, cases in the past five years that have been subject to Rule 12 should be allowed to be re-opened, with this additional independent element of review introduced, in case there have been any unsatisfactory decisions.
default2.5default In cases where the complaint concerns non-medical issues, for example relating to another profession such as pharmacy or psychology, the GMC should be encouraged to consult experts in that profession.
default2.6default The current version of the investigation manual used by the GMC to deal with complaints should be readily accessible on the GMC website. I could not find this important document after I spend considerable time looking for it on the site. 
default2.7default A Fitness to Practice panel usually consists of three individuals. By contrast, when a doctor is appointed to a senior post, such as consultant, the panel usually consists of 7-12 people, a number of whom are expert in the field of the doctor being interviewed. The GMC should carry out a review of whether it is fair to have only 3 individuals on its Fitness to Practice panel, especially as there is scientific evidence to indicate that more members on a panel would result in a fairer decision-making process.
default2.8default All GMC staff, ranging from those involved in the initial screening of complaints, to those on Fitness to Practice panels, should be given rigorous training that includes topics such as the Psychology of conscious and unconscious bias in human decision making. 
default2.9default The review currently being carried out by the GMC into doctors who committed suicide while under investigation should be extended to those who suffered physical or mental health while under investigation. This study should also record the ethnicity of the doctors in question.
default2.10default Where an organization such as a Trust refers a doctor to the GMC, and where the doctor is then partially or fully cleared by the GMC, consideration should be given as to whether the referral from the Trust was ‘vexatious’. If there is prima facie evidence that such a referral may have been vexatious, the GMC – perhaps in conjunction with the Care Quality Commission – should carry out an inquiry. If it is proven that the referral was vexatious, the CQC should take relevant action against the Trust.
default2.11default The GMC should carry out a survey of all doctors who have been through its Fitness to Practice procedures in recent years to find out what better support they could or should have been given to assist their physical, mental and financial well-being.
default2.12default When a Freedom of Information request is made from the GMC, and when some of the information in question is partially or fully redacted, the reasons for the redaction should be clearly stated. In addition, both redacted and non-redacted versions should be lodged with, and be able to be scrutinised by, an independent body to ensure that there was no ‘cover-up’ of information that revealed wrong-doing by the GMC or impinged on patient safety or the well-being of doctors.
default2.13default Where an individual is unhappy with a GMC decision, and takes the matter to Judicial Review at his / her own personal expense, only in exceptional circumstances should the GMC seek costs against the individual in question.
default2.14default To save time and costs for the GMC, for the Court, and for individuals, in the case of Judicial Review the GMC should as a prior remedy seek mediation or arbitration as a means of settling the dispute in question. 
default default2.15default Assistant registrars are usually involved in key decision making processes with regards to complaints about doctors. Currently, they can hind behind a cloak of anonymity. This cloak should be removed. 
default default2.16default GMC staff appear to include a range of professionals, some with medical or legal backgrounds, and some with other forms of background. In order to ensure full transparency, a brief 
defaultcv
default of decision-making GMC staff should be on the GMC website, with an indication of the extent of their knowledge and experience in relation to GMC cases.
default2.17default The GMC should carry out a regular long-term follow-up of every case that goes to the investigation or fitness-to-practice stage, in order to keep a record of the well-being of such individuals and their families, and keep a note of outcomes such as failure to find work, premature death, suicide, etc. 
default2.18default The GMC should consider setting up a Behavioural Insights Team, similar to that used by Downing Street for the past three years, so that insights from the disciplines of Psychology and Human Factors can help to inform a sound basis for
default key processes, decisions and evaluations.
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default