&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Dr defaultUmeshdefault defaultPrabhudefault FRCPCHdefault (GMC0013)defaultExecutive SummarydefaultI am a Medical Director and over the last 20 years done lot of work on patient safety, medical errors, medical leadership, professional regulation and institutional racism and its impact on staff wellbeing and patient safety. I have given more than 100 lectures on all these topics.
defaultI am also a member or previous member of GMC, BMA, and DOH, NCAS Equality and Diversity Committee and BME doctors’ issues.
defaultI was consultant paediatrician (1992-2010), Clinical Director (1992-1998), Medical Director of Bury NHS Trust (1998-2003), NPSA Board Member (2001-2003), Heath Care Commissioner clinical adviser and NCAS Adviser since 2003. 
defaultI have number of suggestions for greater fairness and transparency in GMC procedures and processes.
defaultThis evidence is submitted by me in my personal capacity and also as the National Vice-Chairman of the British International Doctors Association of UK)defaultSuggestionsdefault1.1 defaultGMC can only be a reactive organisation as they can only deal if and when doctors are referred. It is the employers of CCG who have all the information about doctors and it is they who should be dealing with the doctors.
default1.2default Medicine is a risky profession and 85% of medi
defaultc
defaultal errors there are systems failures. GMC has no expertise or skills to look at systems failure and ‘poor 
defaultdoctor’
default gets blamed. Employers have conflict of interest so they tend to blame doctors rather than look at systems.
default1.3 defaultIt is wrong for GMC to investigate any doctor for genuine human error or systems failure. These issues should be dealt locally and both systems and doctors must learn lessons.
default1.4 defaultNHS also has cultural issues like racism, bullying, harassment, victimisation, club culture and Old Boys’ network and the disciplinary action taken depends on the ethnicity of the doctor and many BME doctors are disciplined severely and some non-BME doctors are not held to account or dealt or referred to the regulator. This puts patients’ lives at risk and also BME doctors’ passion and commitment reduces and patients suffer.
default1.5default Most HR Directors, CEOs, Medical Directors, College experts, GMC panel members and experts are all ‘White and men’. So there is no equality and diversity in these and due to bias and discrimination BME doctors get punished more severely for some simple mistakes or errors but many non-BME doctors are not challenged or referred to the regulator. This puts patients’ lives at risk.
defaultSolutionsdefault2.1 defaultEvery Trust, CCG and Institutions must comply with true equality and diversity principles. 
default2.2default Trust and CCG leadership, decision makers and panel members and experts must be diverse and must reflect ethnicity of the organisation including GMC.
default2.3default GMC must provide written guidance to MD and ROs as to which doctors must be referred to the GMC and if they don’t then they must be held to account.
default2.4default MHPS has given the authority to the Trusts and MD to decide when to deal informally and when to deal formally and many Trusts misuse these powers and action taken depends on ethnicity and BME doctors and WB are dealt very harshly and some bad or poorly performing doctors are not tackled at all. This puts patient safety at risk and also puts staff safety at risk.
default2.5default GMC must look at the way they appoint their experts, panel members and this must reflect the ethnicity of the doctors. 
default2.6default Many good doctors’ lives have been ruined by GMC investigation which is often protracted and takes a long time. This is simply not acceptable.
default2.7default GMC experts, FTP panel members do not reflect ethnicity of the doctors registered with the GMC. This results in unfair decisions. 
default2.8default GMC doesn’t performance manage their decision makers, experts and FTP members. GMC must have robust performance management system for all their key staff.
default2.9 There has to be an urgent national debate to make sure professional regulation and the regulation of the NHS are fit for the purpose and all relevant organisations like FMLM, Colleges, BMA, BAPIO, BIDA, GMC, NCAS, NHS Employers and patient support group should be fully involved and engaged.default 
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default