&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr Margaret defaultSealeydefault [FBB0021]default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe present Royal Charter states that “The BBC exists to promote the public interest”. My comments concern two of the areas in which the BBC has this responsibility to promote Public Purposes, namely: 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultUnfortunately the BBC fails in both of t
defaulthese Purposes, and I shall be expanding on this
default;
default and in some departments (not all – and these are the less subscribed, less popular radio programmes e.g. the Radio 4 
defaultSunday
default prog
defaultramme from which I have had courteous replies)
default there seems to be little response
default following a comment
default or complaint
default. The output of the television channels, I have found, it is quite useless to remark upon – there is simply no interest in what viewers have to
default say.
default&#xa0;
defaultSustaining Citizenship and Civil Society.
default  
defaultThe output from the BBC 
defaultregularly
default does not encourage responsible behaviour. My particular concerns are the portrayal of vio
defaultlence and loose sexual values. 
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultViolence
default.  
defaultApart from the depiction of bloody viole
defaultnce in many programmes – even in wild life programmes, where animal behaviour seems to be presented as a model for human behaviour - i
defaultn television soaps, for example, people are frequently 
defaultfurious
default and glaring daggers at each other: the way to be is 
defaultangry
default a
defaultnd abusive
default, and t
defaultearing people apart
default,
default 
defaultat least verbally
default.
default 
defaultWith regard to wild life programmes, presenters like David Attenborough seem to consider human beings the scourge of the planet. 
defaultThe Scare of overpopulation has been around since Malthus in the 1700’
defaults. 
defaultThe population not only eat the cake, they also make it, and in fact are necessary for economic development. Scarcities are brought about by greed, wars and the abuse of the planet. It has been shown by those who have done the mathematics that the whole
default of the earth’s population could be accommodated comfortably in the state of Texas. The real population problem is a catastrophic fall in the birth rate
default in Western countries
default, so 
defaultthat 
defaultthere a
defaultre insufficient young people 
defaultin a population that can look forward
default to a longer life expectancy
default. Thus the proponents of abortion and contraception are the proponents also of euthanasia. The general idea: hate people. People are a scourge. 
defaultIt is irresponsible broadcasting that is the great scourge, not people who can be in
defaultfluenced for good or evil
default – by the BBC
default.
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultLoose Sexual Behaviour
default.   Loose sexual behaviour results in family breakdown and endless misery, particularly for the children involved who 
defaulthave no models of commitment and self sacrificing love in their parents, and
default therefore grow up in a kind of de
defaults
defaultpair
default and a sense of alienation from those who should be nearest to them. It is not surprising if they feel alienated from society as a whole. Who can be trusted? Apart from that
default, through the attitudes of the media general
defaultly, the BBC included,
default they are betrayed and enticed into early sexual experimentation so that sexually transmitted diseases ar
defaulte epidemic; 
defaultmoreover, 
defaulta young person becomes prey to
default the psychological 
defaultand relational 
defaultproblems loose sexual encounters cause
default, seve
defaultrely damaging his/her prospects of forming a stable relationship, fit to build a family on, in the future. Loose sexual behaviour is regularly represented as the way to behave. The BBC 
defaultare
default among the first to decry aberrant sexual behaviour in others, but t
defaulthe 
defaultfirst to present it as a pattern for peoples’ lives. Recently, for example, even on the Radio 4 
defaultToday
default programme, a family, breakfast programme, a retired football coach was interviewed concerning his debaucheries. 
default&#xa0;
defaultStimulating Creativity and Cultural 
defaultExcellence.
default  When one is talking about culture, one has to decide what kind of culture, and cultural excellence, it is t
defaulthat it is desirable to stimula
defaultte.  Over sexualisation and violence in programmes do not advance the cause of mutual respect between the 
defaultsexes, but the tea
defaultring apart of society.  Culture -
default drama, music,
default literature, art -
default 
defaultit always seemed to me, was there to 
defaulthelp us to understand our human condition and react wisely and positively in our difficulties, and to be elevated and comforted by beau
defaultty, kindness and heroism. The culture of our country in earlier times did this. Th
defaulte BBC, even when
default presenting classics, does not 
defaultnow 
defaultdo this. 
defaultThe days of 
defaultPride and 
defaultPrejudice
default, for example, embodying the values that the author intended, are over. 
defaultIn
default presenti
defaultng classics the BBC
default is quite dishonest, ‘interpreting’ them 
defaultin ways that are quite foreign to the int
defaultentions of the authors. In
default 
defaultThe L
defaultion the Witch and the Wardrobe
default Mr Beaver was carping and rude about Mrs Beaver’s cooking (little boys learn how to be carpi
defaultng and rude to their mothers and future wives). In 
defaultSherlock Holmes
default I was shocked to hear the following, bad tempered, reply to some young children who understood that the dead went to heaven: “Of course dead people do not go to heaven. They get put into a 
defaultlittle wooden box and burned”
default (there is no such thing as a happy afterlife, religion is bosh; violence is the only reality)
default. 
default The recent 
defaultFather Brown 
defaultseries was a travesty, and typical of the way the BBC now distorts famous names to 
defaultpresent its
default own 
defaultagenda and 
defaultcultural values
default – which are those of anti religion
default (religion falsely portrayed), 
defaultsex and violence
default.
default              
defaultYes, the BBC is dishonest - in giving us biased versions of the news that will sustain a culture of anti religion, sex and violence. People, who 
defaultwere not black, it was said, did not notice the racialist attitudes that were endemic in society. 
defaultPeople who are not Catholic do not notice the on going anti Catholic attitudes in the BBC. It can be very subtle or quite blatant. I was amazed recently 
defaultto he
defaultar a 
defaultgood
default report about a Catholic priest (he had done a lot to bring together the warring factions in Northern Ireland) instead of endless reports about their bad deeds. Yes, there are priests who do a lot of good but we do not hear about them. 
default              
defaultThis anti
default religion attitude of the BBC and its biased reporting of events is tied up with its other cultural values. In January every year in Washington
default, D.C.
default 
defaultthere is a huge pro-life walk. At the latest t
defaulthere were about 600,
default000 demonstrators
default. Do
default we hear about it o
defaultn the BBC news? 
defaultThe BBC reports on stem cell
default research not differentiating between
default research that uses - and destroys in the process - human embryos, and the use of adult stem cells.  The former, using embryos, of course, the Catholic Church holds as gravely
default immoral, and it is research that has given rise to no useful treatments but in fact has proved to be dangerous
default,
default embryonic stem cells
default being uncontrollable. Adult stem cell treatments have proved very us
defaulteful indeed and are used in 
defaultmore than a hundred differ
defaultent conditions. The Catholic Church 
defaultunjustly 
defaultis made out to be anti science because it is against the destruction of human embryos
default as the source of stem cells
default.
default              
defaultPro-life marches and adult stem cell research, of course, hinder licentious attitudes towards h
defaultuman
default beings and human
default sexual behaviour and violence towards the products of conception
default (
defaultbabies – women are just ‘pregnant’ these days, not ‘with child’)
default. 
default              
defaultSince religion has a great influence on culture (we have only to look at the universities founded by
default the Church in the Middle Ages, the great cathedrals, the poems of Dante and the art of Michaelangelo, for example, to see this)
default,
default an anti religious attitude profoundly affects culture and cultural values.  The BBC has no right to denigrate the faith and cu
defaultlture, particularly of 
defaultour Christian heritage, 
defaultespecially 
defaultwhere
default people of faith 
defaultare obliged 
defaultto pay for this 
defaultdenigration 
defaultwith their licence fee, the BBC
default thinking they are doing such people a great
default favour by allowing them
default the few hours of religious broadcast
defaulting (continuously under threat from the secular section, which greatly dominates the media already
default) that remain to them. Religion affects people’s values, morals, the stability of marriage and the family, and people’s respect for each other. 
defaultReligion affec
defaultts culture:
default c
defaultulture affects citizenship
default.
default We have seen that the BBC promotes a
defaultn anti religious
default culture of sexual licence and violence
default that is against good citizenship
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe BBC is a very large organisation, having different departments, and the behaviour I 
defaulthave just outlined does not typify them all, as I have indicated. The Radio 3 programmes are by and large educational, enjoyable and su
defaultstain a responsible culture,
default 
defaultbut 
defaultsuch departments are in the minority.
default              
defaultSumming Up.
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is important, it seems to me, to have a national broadcasting system funded by the people that like government, under God, is of the people, by the people and for the people. I am not against a system funded by a licence fee, it could be used to the gre
defaultat good of the nation because it is highly influential in forming the cultural values of society. As it is, large parts of the BBC are running amok.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default