&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Chris 
defaultKearton
default (CYS 064)
default&#xa0;
defaultCycl
defaulting 
default in Sheffield
default&#xa0;
defaultI have been commuting and shopping by bike in sheffield
default for 30 years. The only accident I have had was when I got my wheel caught in a tram-line (they are lethal and I do my best to avoid the roads they run on) – in particular the tram stops make it very difficult to stay between the rail and the kerb, necessi
defaulttating a swerve to cross the rails at sufficient angle to avoid the wheel being trapped
default, taking the cyclist into the path of cars.
default 
defaultCycle lanes in Sheffield are incoherent, difficult to navigate and at times pitch cyclists and pedestrians against each othe
defaultr. They are often placed in short sections on roads as traffic calming measures.  A recent long term contract between Sheffield City Council and Amey only guarantees “like for like” renovation.
defaultI cycle along the A61 from Hillsborough to Shalesmoor and ther
defaulte is a pitiful cycle track which includes some pavement, some abandoned side road, and many dangerous small/private junctions. It is not possible to cycle safely on the path at more than 8-10 miles per hr, and even then I think it is more dangerous than us
defaulting he wide dual-carriageway which has good visibility and a reasonable surface.  However, I often get shouted at by motorists because I am not on the cycle path – I use the road because it is safer (for me and pedestrians I may hit) and because I want to 
defaulttravel at 18-20 mph. 
defaultIt is a great shame that many motorists see cyclists as a hindrance, rather than as 1 less car in front of them – an advertising campaign would help. The recent comments of a senior London policeman, suggesting people only cycle if th
defaultey don’t have a car or bus fare, does not help.
defaultI also cycle up Hanover Way – the cycle track is rarely cleared of debris, pedestrians are usually on the cycle part, and the section leading cyclists under the roundabout is not in any sense a cycle path – i
defaultt is not possible to be other than a pedestrian at that point. Cyclists are probably safer on the road, and pedestrians would certainly be safer if that was the case. 
defaultI always wear a helmet and fluorescent outer layer. I think the key to avoiding accident
defaults is making eye contact with motorists when they are looking to turn right in front of you, or to pull out from your left. I assume t
defaulth
defaultey will not see me and I start braking if I cant make eye con
defaultt
defaultact.
default At least 2-3 times pw I have to brake because drivers h
defaultave not looked properly.
defaultAs a driver, and mindful of hostility to cyclists, I am concerned about the power of some front lights used on bikes-  they dazzle as much as full beam car headlights and I think they are unhelpful.
default&#xa0;
default Sheffield City Council recentl
defaulty signed a £2 billion, 25 year contract with 
defaultAmey
default 
defaulthttps://www.sheffield.gov.uk/roads/works/schemes/streetsaheadproject.html
default , which is already delivering smooth surfa
defaultced, well marked and lit streets. However there is no provision within this contract to improve the situation for the growing number of cyclists (as evidenced by the growth of cycle shops from a handful of small frame makers and independent suppliers to th
defaulte presence of most of the major national players in this market). The council’s web page on the road improvement lists all the benefits without mention of cyclists. Researching this submission led me to cyclesheffield, an organisation I will now join, whic
defaulth is campaigning and trying to work with Amey to get the best out of the situation: 
defaulthttp://www.cyclesheffield.org.uk/2013/11/08/scc-carry-on-installing-crap-
defaultcycle-lanes/
default  is an example of how not to “improve” cycle lanes.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default