BRC34
defaultWritten Evidence defaultfromdefault Mr Carl Bennett, MD of Tradeskills4U LtddefaultShort Summary of submission.
defaultThe electrical Workforce.default1default.defaultIntroduction.default1default.1default 
defaultI’m Carl Bennett the Managing Director of 
defaultTradeskills4Udefault Ltddefault. We are the UK's largest educator of the electrical installation adult workforce and the country’s only specialist electrical IET ‘Centre of Excellence’, to put this into context, we
default’re
default actually a modest family run company employ
defaulting 
default30 people. 
default1default.2default 
defaultWh
defaultat we are is a business to business company with an enviable reputation and 98% 
defaultcandidate 
defaultapproval rating. We are an independent company; 
defaultnone
default funded organization. Chairman Clive Betts MP and other MPs have visited our facilities.
default1default.3default 
defaultWe train approximatel
defaulty
default 
default3000 adult candidates each year in a full range of electrical domestic, commercial and industrial skills and adult vocational qualifications, many for continuing professional development. We also train adult apprentices and Domestic electrical installers
default to enable them to register on the various Competent Person’s Schemes. 
default1.4default 
defaultOur core candidates are 
default75%default existing electrical and other trade’s contractors and 
default25%default new entrants.  
default95 %default of our candidates are micro business owners and employers, essentially the
default backbone of the industry. 
default1default.5default 
defaultLike any good business, we constantly engage with our customers/candidates. Dozens are literally under our roof every day, many of them are electrical contractors and others not fully qualified electricians but are employed 
defaultwithin the greater electrical industry because of their ability to work within the Competent Person Schemes, they have a wide range of experience in many other trades and also have competency in electrical installation to undertake that role as their main 
defaultoccupation 
defaultrequires I.e. Heating engineers, kitchen fitters, home maintenance contractors, auto gate installers, gas engineer
defaults
default, the list is too numerous to be exhaustive within this space
default1default.6default 
defaultAs M
defaultD
default it’s my job to gather evidence, engage with and listen to 
defaultopinions from every aspect of the wider industry of electrical installation to ensure we supply the right training, qualifications and skills options for employers, electricians, associated trades, companies and new entrants into the industry. 
default1default.7default 
defaultThese p
defaulteople and their businesses are
default 
defaultmy
default 
defaultconstituency,
default and 
defaultthey e
defaultnable 
defaultme
default to 
defaulthave a well rounded and perhaps unique view of the domestic electrical installation, repair, maintenance, improvement, upgrade and service industry and in fact the wider issue of the ski
defaultlls level of the electrical industry
default and 
defaultshould 
defaultentitle 
defaultme
default to express opinions and suggestions in contribution to your debate.
default 
default&#xa0;default2default. defaultThe electrical defaultworkdefault forcedefault, from an industry trainer’s perspectivedefault.default2default.1default 
defaultIt is worth noting, the wider world of the electrical
default installation industry does not belong solely to the institutions of the Electrical Industry. The heating engineer who wires in your boiler is not in the electrical industry, the kitchen fitter, landscape gardener or home maintenance contractor is not in t
defaulthe electrical industry but nevertheless, everyday they, and many others like them, work quite competently and diligently with electrics.
default 
default2default.2default 
defaultThis large group of stakeholders,
default certainly in their tens of thousands, 
defaultrival in numbers
default to any of the 
defaultorganizatio
defaultn
defaults
default that has spoken to you so far, rarely ha
defaultve their
default opinions listened to by those with the power to steer the industry
default. These people must be considered in your deliberations.
default2default.3 defaultPerhaps because we are an independent educator of the workforce, 
defaultwe are 
defaultable to offer observations 
defaultas educator
defaults
default of the workforce 
defaultthat seem quite contrary to some of the view 
defaultI 
defaulthave heard expressed to you so far.
default2default.4default 
defaultIn particular our view of the supply of future workers to small employers is very definitely not a positive one.
default&#xa0;
defaulta)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe
default IETdefault (Institution of Engineering Technology), o
defaultne of the world's largest organisations for engineers and technicians who have warned that proposed reforms to government funding could lead to a reduction in UK apprenticeships. We agree with IET claims 
defaultthat the reforms are likely to reduce quality and deter SMEs from taking part in apprenticeship schemes and have criticised apprenticeship reforms, saying that the changes would incur higher costs that may prevent smaller businesses from taking on apprenti
defaultces.
default&#xa0;
defaultb)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe 
defaultEdge Foundationdefault, a leading independent education charity, pointed to the government's own research that suggests apprentice numbers could fall by 
default73%default when employers have to pay at least half the cost.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultc)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultOur views are also consistent with the views of Nigel Whitehead 
defaultUKCESdefault Commissioner with regard to the future of our adult workforce and the recommendations he has made in his report of 8
defaultth
default November 2013 to improve the vocational qualification structure of 
defaultour adult workforce to better reflect small employer’s needs. 
defaultOur op
defaultinion is that at the moment they do not.
default3default. defaultShortage of workforce supply.default3default.1default 
defaultIt may surprise you to learn that the person that comes to your door to undertake some electrical work for you in your home is almost certainly going to be a 
defaultproperly qualified 
defaultCompetent Person and a member of a Competent Person Scheme. They are probably u
defaultnlikely to be a so called ‘fully qualified electrician’. (That is a contractor who has served a full time traditional apprenticeship with a full set of qualifications
default i.e a Level 3 NVQ plus other qualifications
default) This is a fact that surprises many existing 
defaultelectrical contractors who wrongly assume the ‘fully qualified electrician’ to be in the majority.
default It is certainly our experience that 
defaultan increasing majority of 
defaultelectricians are ‘fully qualified’
default,
default many hav
defaulting
default failed to keep up with current regulations, tec
defaulthnologies and changes in 
defaultbest 
defaultpractices
default.
default&#xa0;default4default. defaultCompetent Persons keep the system defaultworking.default4default.1default 
defaultIt is o
defaultur estimation
default,
default gained from experience of the thousands of small contractor companies with whom we engage and is compatible with
default many electrical education and workforce reports I have seen and other business and training leaders in our sector
default we
default have spoken
default with
default that
default less than 
default50%default of people who undertake electrical work in this country are what you might call ‘fully qualified elect
defaultricians’, the remainder are likely to be properly trained, qualified and experienced Competent Persons with a wide range of experience in many other trades who also have competency in electrical installations to undertake that role as their main occupation
default requires and I
default have
default no 
defaultevidence to 
defaultdoubt 
defaultthey 
defaultdo a proper and safe job.  
default4default.2default 
defaultFrankly if it were not for Competent Persons undertaking electrical work by the tens of thousands, the electrical infrastructure of this country would be compromised and poorly 
defaultserviced. There are not enough so called ‘fully qualified electricians’
default. Many more experienced 
defaultin the industry 
defaultthan me I have heard
default,
default argue
default in fact there really never has been. Pre Part P we just didn’t monitor electrical work undertaken to any great degree
default, lots of this relatively minor and domestically defined work went 
defaultunseen, compared with today, where electrical work is more visible due to Part P regulations.     
default4default.3default 
defaultIt
default i
defaults my information and experience of our engagement with contractors that the 
defaultnumbers of electricians with full qualifications are rapidly dwindling and set to reduce at alarming rates in the coming years. The JIB
default (Joint Industry Board)
default, state, in their latest Labour Report 
default2012 
defaultof their 18,000 total membership, that only 
default31%default of the
defaultir 
default‘
defaultexperienced members
default’
default have full qualifications. JTL 
default(The industry’s largest NVQ trainer) 
defaultwith whom we work closely stated to us
default,
default in a recent apprenticeships meeting
default,
default that they expect 
default52%default of the experienced workforce to retire in the next 8-10 years. We 
defaultalso know that industry apprenticeships are down 
default20%default on last year
default.
default 
defaultThe 
defaultJIB itself completed only 
default7default (
defaultsevendefault) apprentices last year, staggering
default, but 
defaultcertainly 
defaultnot their fault in my opinion, it’s the qualification 
defaultroute 
defaultwith which they work 
defaultis to blame
default.
default 
default4default.4default 
defaultI’m sure and hope you’re aware that just over 
default90 % defaultof the electrical installation industry is made up of very small businesses, comprising typically of 
defaultvery small teams of
default contractors, large employers account for no more than 
default10%default of the industry, yet seemi
defaultngly get much more than 
default10%default of the say in to how the industry is run.  
default&#xa0;default5default.default The entry routes for employment in the electrical industry are ‘not fit for purpose’default.default5.1default 
defaultThe purpose of apprenticeships and career routes into the industry are to secure and train the future workforce for the benefit of us all. 
defaultThey are not working as they should and this is relevant for your committee to consider because electrical workforce that operates under Part P is set to dwindle rapidly in coming years. 
default5.2default 
defaultFrom a training provider’s perspective,
default a single qualification s
defaultystem to enter the industry is ‘not fit for purpose’. 
defaultTh
defaulte
default 
defaultentry to industry 
defaultqualification
default system
default 
defaultneeds
default to
default 
defaultstart at a level that is achievable for the 
defaultperson to which it is 
defaultintended
default,
default more innovative
default in design
default,
default better reflecting the needs of
default modern society
default a
defaultnd 
defaultthe small employer
default, enabling them to manage an appropriate qualification for the role the new entrant worker or apprentice would fulfill.  
default5default.default3default 
defaultLarge companies and some of the traditional organization in the industry have a different view from small 
defaultcontractors particularly with regard to apprenticeships
default and the training of their employees
default. 
default5default.default4default 
defaultI can tell you as the 
defaultM
defaultD
default of an organization that probably trains more candidates for apprenticeships than m
defaultany
default others you have heard from, that the Small empl
defaultoyers 
default(the 90%)default do not and cannot support the current 
defaultqualification routes open to their potential staff. 
default 
default5default.default5default 
defaultObviously
default large employers are supportive
default they
default 
defaulthave 
defaultlarge
default budgets and 
defaultspare 
defaultmanpower
default plus 
defaultthe small contractor is competition
default,
default what better way to remove competition than to starve them of staff
default.
default5default.default6default 
defaultThe small employer/contractor tasked with the actual job of training, paying for the training as well as paying and employing and paying 
defaultthe majority of 
defaultapprentices
default in the UK
default 
defaultare
default not 
defaultsupportive
default. T
defaulthey can’t afford the time and cost
default, they do all they can do to keep their heads above water, never mind bear the responsibility of training up the future 
defaultwork
default force
default. 
default5default.default7default 
defaultThe purpose of entry qualifications into the industry are to attract
default 
defaultand
default secure a future workforce. At the moment they don’t
default. T
defaulthe modern face of the industry has changed since those supposed past halcyon days, big employers have gone in the numbers they once were. The training of the apprentices in any decent numbers now relie
defaults on the hard pressed micro businesses that are not geared up, and are neither skilled, nor economically viable enough to support a traditional apprenticeship 
defaultroute to entry
default 
defaultwhich is seen by many in my sector as no longer ‘fit for purpose’, the numbers spe
defaultak for themselves. 
default5default.default8default 
defaultThe common reason for not supporting 
defaultthe current entry qualification
defaults
default  
defaulta)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultA
default one size fits 
defaultqualification 
defaultas entry to the industry 
defaultdoes not 
defaultreflect the needs of the small employer, 
defaulta full 3 year apprenticeship is too onerous a 
defaultcommitment, regretfully the current qualification r
defaulteflects the needs of the few big employers.
default 
defaultb)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe current Electrical NVQ is academically challenging to the average person, as a result dropout rates are alarming.    
defaultc)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIt is
default not suitable
default 
defaultfor adults. Adult l
defaultearners can’t afford to live on the low wages an apprentice gets paid 
defaultover a protracted 3 years. H
defaulte/she are likely to have dependents and commitments that don’t allow them to learn and work at the same time for a prolonged period.
defaultd)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSmall businesses, have di
defaultfficulty to support them giving cost,
default 
defaultand the 
defaultadministration
default plus 
defaultthey
default are un
defaultlikely
default to have the 
defaultrelevant
default 
defaultskills
default or time
default to be able
default to convey knowledge to a student. 
default&#xa0;default6default. defaultCompetent Persons qualification v Full NVQ defaultqualificationdefault.default6default.1default 
defaultThe training for full NVQ, please note, 
defaultthe training
default, i.e 
default the skills and knowledge that a person is taught in a college
default, not the 
defaultworkbased a
defaultssessment 
defaultand gathering of experience 
defaultwhich follows
default 
defaulttraining
default,
default commonly called ‘an apprenticeship’.
default6default.2default The typical 
defaultdelivery of
default training
default in centre by 
defaultand
default FE 
defaultCollege
default is one day a week for 3 years. For easy comparison if you took the same course full time, it would be of 16 weeks duration
default6default.3default 
defaultThis covers everything from installation of sockets 
defaultin your home 
defaultto 
defaultthe 
defaultsubstati
defaulton
default down the road
default, domestic, commercial and industrial
default. H
defaultowever it’s a one size fits all 
defaultand is designed for a 16-19 year old with zero transferable skills from other work experience. 
default6default.4default 
defaultThe Domestic electrical element within an apprenticeship qualification is of 8 weeks duration; again assuming you did it as full time training. 
default6default.5default 
defaultBy no coincidence the new 
defaultqualification 
default‘Level 3 certificate in Installing, Testing and Ensuring Compliance
default of Electrical Installations in Dwellings’ 
defaultthat enables a person to become a Competent person comprises of 12 weeks full time 
defaulttraining
default, so well over and above that of an 
defaultNVQ
default qualification.
default6default.6default 
defaultThe assumption that Domestic Competency training is somehow inf
defaulterior to a Full 
defaultNVQ
default is incorrect and misinformed. The training for the Domestic element is equal if not superior. Also usually because the demographic for this qualification is a 24+ years adult and they bring other relevant skills with them
default,
default their compete
defaultncy is likely to be higher
default.
default 
default7default. defaultSummarydefault.defaulta)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere are not enough so called ‘fully qualified electricians’ in the UK to meet current and certainly not future 
defaultincreasing 
defaultdemand.
defaultb)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere are not enough new entrants either younger persons or adults 
defaultjoining the
default industry
default to cover the current and future loss of labour. 
defaultc)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe current entry level is set too high and needs intermediate level. 
defaultd)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Competency schemes are all that keeps the electrical infrastructure repaired, maintained, upgraded, amended, functioning e
defaulttc. Remove these and there will be significant negative
default impact
default.
defaulte)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe training and qualifications for competency schemes is good and 
defaultimproving
default and certainly up to the grade required for the job role. 
defaultf)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe Electrical design of our Domestic System is inherentl
defaulty safe and has become 
defaultmore 
defaultso as a result of Part P Regs. Though better monitoring and public awareness is necessary.
defaultg)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSince inception of 
defaultPart P regulations 
defaultwe have been able to monitor the majority of
default electrical work, previously it was chaotic and invisibl
defaulte.
defaulth)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere is no evidence of Cowboys being an unequal part of Competent persons schemes compared to the traditional electrician. Cowboys are surely just dishonest people no matter what their status in the industry.
defaulti)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThere is lots of evidence and expert opinion that the current 
defaultroutes 
defaultinto
default the industry are
default not ‘fit for purpose’. Is failing our new entrants, failing our small employers, failing our requirements of a secure 
defaultwork
default force for the future. 
defaultj)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultMany decision maker
defaults in the industry I know agree with our opinions and suggestions, but fear expressing them in fear of alienating their traditional workforce.
default&#xa0;default8default. defaultOur suggestion of a Domestic Electrician Grade to ensure constant supply of workforce and progression entry defaultinto industry.default&#xa0;default8default.1default 
defaultThe one size fits all 
defaultroute into the industry
default is flawed, too expensive and too 
defaultchallenging for the person for which it is intended 
default. We suggest there should be properly understood and accepted multi grades of electricians. Each capable 
defaultof progressing to the higher level above.
default 
defaultW
defaulte suggest an additional grade of electrician 
defaultto sit 
defaultbetween the Competent person and the Full NVQ Qualified electrician as below. 
default8default.2default 
defaultThis would have the advantage of people entering the industry with a 
defaultqualification based on what job they would actually be doing
default and 
defaultthen provides a 
defaultmanageable
default 
defaultand
default cost effective stepping stone to progression for the Full qualification
default and by design naturally upgrades safety &amp; best 
defaultpractice
default. 
default8default.3default 
defaultWe suggest three grades of
default persons allowed to undertake electrical work. 
defaultEach grade capable of progression.
default   
defaultGrades
default in 
defaultascending 
defaultorder
default,
default   
defaultCdefault. 
defaultCompetent Domestic Electrical Installer.
default For allied 
defaulttrades,
default Heating engineer etc. 
default (As exists but with proper industry recognition
default and mandatory registration
default)
default defaultBdefault. 
defaultThe Domestic Electrician. Domestic only work. (A shorter more defined competence qualification to better reflect the role, based on achievement not length)
defaultAdefault. 
defaultThe Approved 
defaultElectrician (
defaultComprising of Domestic, Commercial and
default Industrial) 
default          
default  
default8default.4default 
defaultToo many people are working in electrics with no training, no qualifications, little or no knowledge. 
defaultWe need to u
defaultse the carrot rather than the stick
default. The
default structure above would encourage people to do the right, who might otherwise not take qualifications or proper training
default as they see it as too onerous and expensive
default.
default      
default Give them an entry level that fits their job role
default, pocket and people’s modern busy li
defaultves. A
default gradual progressive career path to higher levels solving our apprenticeship supply issue and is consistent with the goals of the Whitehead report.     
default8default.6default 
defaultWe 
defaultalso 
defaultsuggest there should be a mandatory registering system for anyone that works with ele
defaultctrics
default, therefore there being an advantage in doing the right thing. 
default8default.7default 
defaultFinally please 
defaultd
defaulto not to fix what isn’t broke due to mischievous self interest lobbying disguised as a safety initiative. We are using electrical systems increasingly in our lives, f
defaultrom reliance on computer systems to car charging to smart homes to green energy
default.
default 
defaultN
defaulto cooker or boiler
default,
default heating system 
defaultor computer network 
defaultwill work without it. Electricity is becoming a greater part of our lives not less. If you restrict the numbers of peop
defaultle who are able to service our systems or
default 
defaultplace too many hurdles in their way, they will simply ignore them 
defaultand ignore what legislation you put in place 
defaultand it will cause us all difficulty and affect the efficiency and economy 
defaultfor
default us all.
default 
defaultThis much more 
defaultimportant than a tweak of Part P,
defaultWe certainly intend to 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultplay our part in 
defaultdesigning new qualifications and 
defaultencouraging people to do the right thing.
defaultSubmitted for your consideration. 
default&#xa0;
defaultwww.tradeskills4u.co.uk
default 
default&#xa0;
default3 December 2013
default1
default&#xa0;
default