&#xa0;
defaultWritten defaultevidence submitteddefault by Nicholas Lewisdefault (IPC0017)default defaultI am an independent, self-funded climate 
defaultscience 
defaultresearcher. In recent years I have specialised in the key area of climate 
defaultsensitivity. My work has been published in the peer reviewed literature and is cited and discussed in the IPCC
default’
defaults Fifth Assessment Report
default (AR5)
default.
default I was an expert reviewer of AR5.
defaultare unreliable
default and/or unable to provide usefully well-constrained estimates
default. I 
defaultagree with
default this conclusion.
default That
default leaves in essence only
default estimates based on 
defaultobservations of warming over 
defaultmulti-decadal periods
default. Useful surface temperature records extend back approximately 150 years (the 
default‘
defaultinstrumental period
default’
default). However, 
defaultglobal warming ‘in the pipeline’
default is predominantly reflected in ocean heat uptake, calculated from changes in sub-surface temperatures, records of
default which extend back only 50 years.
defaultThis last 
defaultapproach 
defaultrepresents poor design
default. It is impossible to estimate aerosol forcing 
default– which largely affects the northern hemisphere –
defaultwith any accuracy without separate 
defaulttemperature 
defaultdata for, at a minimum, 
defaultthe 
defaultnorth
defaultern
default and south
defaultern
default hemispheres. 
defaultare eliminated from the assessment,
default the average ECS for those that remain
default is, at 1.8°C, 
defaultconsiderably
default lower than the GCM average of 3.2°C, but close to the energy-budget 
defaultbest 
defaultestimate of 1.7°C that was outlined in the last paragraph. 
defaultis unscientific.
defaultDecember
default 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultObservationally-based methods
default involve some limited use of models.
default In the form of a weight given to each possible value for it.
default The posterior takes the form of a probability distrib
defaultution for the property of interest rather than a point estimate.
default 
defaultSuch a prior is not a representation of an understanding of the likely value of 
defaultwhat is being estimated
default, but is simply a prior calculated to give an objective answer.
default Incorrectly in two c
defaultases.
default 
defaultWhen, as is very much the case for ECS, the parameter involved does not have a straight line relationship with the observational data from which it is being estimated, a uniform prior generally prevents the estimate fairly reflecting the data.
default 
defaultht
defaulttp://www.bishop-hill.net/blog/2013/1/25/uniform-priors-and-the-ipcc.html
default 
defaultUsing a mathematical, 
defaultnoninformative
default,
default prior
default.
default T
defaulthe top of the 5-95% range for the study
default’
defaults ECS estimate
default as given in Table 9.3 of AR4-WG1.
default WG1 report, 
defaultFigure 10.20.b)
default.
default Forster and Gregory 2006 used standard non-Bayesian statistics, which are intrinsically objective and (as often the case) gave the same results as using an objective Bayesian method.
defaultA critical analysis 
defaultthat I wrote 
defaultof Instrumental and Combination ECS es
defaulttimates shown in Figure 10.20.b) of AR5-WG1 is available at: http://niclewis.wordpress.com/ipcc-ar5-climate-sensitivity-and-other-issues/ar5_ecs_estimates/. 
defaultLikewise an
default analysis of TCR estimates shown in Figure 10.20.a) of AR5-WG1 is available at http://ni
defaultclewis.wordpress.com/ipcc-ar5-climate-sensitivity-and-other-issues/ar5_tcr_estimates/
default 17–83% probability
default In other words, the average of the GCM estimates and their range (which was interpreted conservatively).
default In principle, studies that used observat
defaultional data to form their own estimate of the aerosol effect would be unaffected by a revision in the consensus estimate of it. However, in practice all such climate sensitivity studies featured in AR4 were badly flawed in other ways. 
default The method involves comparing changes in the average levels of three key variables between two multi-year periods, normally one early in the instrumental period and one at the end of it.
default 
defaultBased on 
default(a) 
defaultthe AR5 best estimates of the 
defaultcombined 
defaultwarming/coolin
defaultg strength (forcing) of greenhouse gases, aerosols and other agents over the instrumental period, and of ocean heat uptake
default; (b)
default using the longest principal global surface temperature dataset
default; and (c)
default 
defaultmeasuring 
defaultchanges between multi-year periods early in an
defaultd at the end of the instrumental period with similar volcanic activity
default.
default 
default.
default 
defaultReferences herein to best estimates are to medians (50% probability points) unless otherwise stated.
default 
defaultAldrin
default et al. (2012) (the estimate of which was, exceptionally, not significa
defaultntly affected by the subjective Bayesian method used); Ring et al. (2012) (average of four estimates); Otto et al. (2013) (averaging the 2000-2009 and 1970-2009 period estimates); and Lewis (2013) (preferred main results estimate). 
default Taking median estimat
defaultes from Schwartz (2012), Gillett et al. (2013) and (averaging the 2000-2009 and 1970-2009 period estimates) Otto et al. (2013). 
defaultAldrin
default et al. (2012) and Lewis (2013) did not provide ranges for TCR, but their ECS estimates imply TCR best estimates below 1.4
default°C. 
default 
default2016–2035 relative to 1986-2005
default 
defaultTol
default, R. 2009. The Economic Effects of Climate Change. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 23(2): 29-51.
default&#xa0;
default