&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence from the Directory of Social Change [CEP0013]default&#xa0;defaultAbout the Directory of Social ChangedefaultThe Directory of 
defaultSocial Change (DSC) has a vision of an independent voluntary sector at the heart of social change. We believe that the activities of charities and other voluntary organisations are crucial to the health of our society.
defaultThrough our publications, courses and
default conferences, we come in contact with thousands of organisations each year. The majority are small to medium-sized, rely on volunteers and are constantly struggling to maintain and improve the services they provide.
defaultWe are not a membership body. Our public
default commentary and the policy positions we take are based on clear principles, and are informed by the contact we have with these organisations. We also undertake campaigns on issues that affect them or which evolve out of our research.
defaultWe view our role as th
defaultat of a ‘concerned citizen’, acting as a champion on behalf of the voluntary sector in its widest sense. We ask critical questions, challenge the prevailing view, and try to promote debate on issues we consider to be important.
default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefaultRecent debate 
defaultin the media on the matter of charity Chief Executive pay has not reflected the reality for the vast majority of charities in the UK. Nor has it been put into context with other organisations (for example in the public or private sector) and how th
defaultey remun
defaulterate senior managers for comparable levels of responsibility.
defaultIn fact, some of the statements made 
defaultappear to be based on 
defaulta misunderstanding of the facts
default – for example the phrase ‘charity boardroom pay’
default is a misrepresentation
default. 
defaultIn fact a miniscule number of
default trustees are paid for their role and probably well over 90% perform their duties on an entirely voluntary basis.
defaultThis
default debate 
defaultis clearly of public interest but it is vital that it is 
defaultinformed by facts
default, 
defaultevidence,
default and context,
default not conjecture, speculation and
default media hype. Otherwise unjustified damage to public trust and confidence in 
defaultall charities (not just those with ‘highly pa
defaulti
defaultd’ CEOs
default)
default may result. Below we draw together some key facts and information with the aim of informing discussion and debate about the i
defaultssue.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe nature of the charitable sectordefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultThe role of trusteesdefault in setting Chief Executive paydefault“Look carefully and critically at the areas of highest risk – this will vary and will depend on the charity’s risk ass
defaultessment.”
default (CC25: Managing charity assets and resources: an overview for trustees, at paragraph E.)
default              
defaultAnd also,
default“It is a duty of the charity trustees to ensure that the charity’s resources are protected in order that the charity can fulfil its aims.”
default (CC8: Internal financial controls for charities, at paragraph B.)
default“Make the best use of staff by regularly reviewing what sk
defaultills and experience are needed, what recruitment methods it uses and its training and working conditions.” 
default(CC25: Managing charity assets and resources: an overview for trustees, at paragraph
default H.)
default&#xa0;
defaultCharity transparencydefault&#xa0;defaultConclusiondefault&#xa0;
defaultThere appear to be two quite different and even contradictory 
defaultnarratives emanating from Government and MPs on this issue at the moment.
default On the one hand the Government has 
defaultlaunched its drive 
defaulttowards pluralised and more localised forms
default of public service provision through the Open Public Services 
defaultagenda
default, and has said th
defaultat it wants charities to participate in this.
defaultYet at the same time statements 
defaultfrom some politicians as part of this debate 
defaultsuggest that large and complex 
defaultcharitable 
defaultorganisations should (and could) be run 
defaultfor free, or that somehow charities should be able 
defaultto attract the skilled leadership they need on a 
defaultpurely 
defaultvoluntary basis.
defaultThe 
defaultpotential 
defaultdamage
default caused
default to 
defaultthe charitable sector 
defaultoverall
default by an uninformed debate
default is more concerning
default however, as only a small minority of charities will ever be in a position to 
defaultta
defaultke on public service contracts
default. The public 
defaulthave
default not been given the full 
defaultpicture 
defaultin the debate 
defaultover charity chief executive pay
default to date,
default but the headlines will likely have stuck in the popular consciousness. This is potentially very damaging to the trust wh
defaultich the
default public holds for charities, with consequences for the flow of donations of time and money.
defaultWe call on the Committee to 
defaultconsider the evidence in the round during 
defaultits investigations
default and subsequent reporting
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSummary of a survey of charities in defaultcontact with DSCdefaultDSC is not a membership organisation but is in touch with tens of thousands of charities via its newsletter and the many services it provides. For this enquiry, we carried out a survey of charities on the question of charity CEO pay
default during
default November 2013
default. The responses are analysed below.
default&#xa0;
defaultSummary analysis: default&#xa0;
defaultIn our 
defaultsample - which was constructed on a voluntary, opt-in basis - the majority of respondents came from organisations which either had a CEO paid below £60,001 or they had no CEO at all (58%). 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe majority noted that CEO pay had not been a barrier to fundrai
defaultsing. Compliance with publishing salaries in charitable accounts was high, and 12 organisations volunteered this information when there was no obligation 
defaultfor
default them to do so.
default&#xa0;
defaultOne third
default of respondents
default reviewed their CEO’s salary at least once every three years, though often more frequently. Just under a quarter review their salaries on a more ad-hoc basis. There
default were also some examples of CEO
defaults who had not received even a review in three or more years –
default in one case a respondent told us there had not been a review since the CEO was appointed 11 years ago.
default&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaultere were 1
default20 total respondents
default to the survey; of these 
default106 had a CEO or general m
defaultanager with a similar function, and 
default14 did not.
default&#xa0;
defaultDetailed findings:default&#xa0;
defaultOf those respondents who di
defaultd have a CEO or similar post:
default&#xa0;
defaultMore than 53% of those who supplied a pay band for their CEO were in the £30,000 - £50,000 range.
default&#xa0;
defaultComments on thdefaulte question of the CEO salary level vdefaultariedefaultd:default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultPublishing information on salaries in the charity’s accountsdefault&#xa0;
default4
default5 organisations 
defaultsaid they 
defaultdid not publish the CEO salary in their accounts, 36 did. Of those who did the majority were over £50,000 – 26 organisations. 12 
defaultorganisations said that they published the salary even when they did not have to do so (
defaulti.e. 
defaultwhen it was below £60,000). 
default&#xa0;
default3 organisations who said they paid in the £70,001 - £80,000 band declared that they did not publish this figure in the accounts. We c
defaultan only assume that they were either incorrect or their organisation was not producing accounts to the appropriate standard.
default&#xa0;
defaultBdefaulteing refused funding on the basidefaults of the CEO’s salarydefault&#xa0;
default77 organisations said that they had not, to their knowledge, ever been ref
defaultused funding on the bas
defaultis of their CEO’s salary. 5 said they had been refused funding on this basis 
defaultand one was un
defaultsure. For
default the 5 who 
defaultsaid they 
defaulthad 
defaultbeen refused, 
defaulttheir 
defaultCEO 
defaultsalaries ranged from £50,001 to over £100,000.
default&#xa0;
defaultFrequency of rdefaulteviewing the CEO’s saldefaultarydefault&#xa0;
default32 organisations reviewed their CEO’s salary annually. One carried out a biennial review and two others a triennial review. 25 reviewed on an ad-hoc basis. A few respondents did not know. One noted that their CEO had not had a pay review in eleven yea
defaultrs, despite requesting one. One other had not been reviewed in six years, another two for five years, another for four years and yet another for three years.  Two were tied to the NJC scale and one other received an inflationary rise.
default&#xa0;
defaultComments from respondefaultdentsdefault&#xa0;
defaultWe asked the respond
defaultents to comment on these issues, and below we include a selection of responses:
default&#xa0;
default“You must have someone in charge who can make the best use of the charity's resources. A really good CEO will do that - a really bad one will not. 
defaultThe latter will waste way more resources of the charity's resources than the increase in salary r
defaultequired to employ a good one” (band £30,001-£40,000)
default&#xa0;
default“The premise of the question is entirely the wrong focus on what constitutes a very small minority of peo
defaultple - we are not talking bankers' sized-pay, here. The emphasis should be on low paid workers in the voluntary sector and an understanding that to get the best people, you need to pay the going rate - at ALL levels.”
default&#xa0;
default“This debate has been grossly distorte
defaultd by a few examples of large national charities based in Central London. I share the concern that in the public's perception it seems at odds with the concept of charity to have a Chief Exec being paid a six figure salary. Personally I'm uneasy at anything
default which takes the staff of a charity so far away from the lived experience of the people they work with. However, if you compare the charity CEO pay to what those people would earn in an equivalent sized organisation in the private sector, charity CEOs are 
defaultpaid a lot less. Perhaps the real argument is about whether the myth of the magical dynamic super-powered shaman CEO is what's at fault and the charity sector's biggest mistake is to be mimicking the behaviour of the private sector rather than modelling so
defaultmething more progressive?”
default&#xa0;
default“[The salary] varies +/- 20% by simply varying hours.  This is result of vagaries of funding.   She works more than full time regardless.”
default&#xa0;
default“I do not see why CEO's of small or large charities should be paid less than commercial 
defaultCEO's - the job creates more social value than corporate CEOs and requires equal business skills and acumen as any other organisation.”
default&#xa0;
default“In small charities there has to be a common sense approach to pay and what can be afforded in comparison to what can b
defaulte spent on the front line. Small charities struggle every year in making ends meet and just because there is a CEO doesn't mean there is 
defaultan
default extravagant approach to pay. Some years we have considered reducing pay across the board to make ends meet and that 
defaultmeans setting an example from the top.”
default&#xa0;
default“Some charities are big businesses employing hundreds of people and impacting on thousands of lives.  The pressure is enormous and a CEO's responsibility is often overwhelming.  Their salaries are commensurate with 
defaultthis.”
default&#xa0;
default“Charities should look closely at whether they could use the money more cost effectively by employing more staff at a lower levels.  My experience shows that now the charity is paying for a CEO some of its charitable work has had to stop because th
defaultere is not enough money left to pay staff at lower levels.”
default&#xa0;
default“It's way too low, the CEO wouldn't accept this level of pay (neither would any of the staff) except that they're financially able to -- given the qualifications of the CEO, s/he should be earnin
defaultg at least double this pay.”
default&#xa0;
default“This is the CEO reporting here, so I may be a little biased.  Considering my skills, and the size of the organisation, and my responsibilities, I consider myself to be underpaid.  I think there's a gender issue here - if I we
defaultre a man, I suspect that the board would have taken my request over 4 years ago (when things were better!) to have my pay reviewed would have been taken more seriously.  I instigated a review of the two next most senior officers, because their pay didn't r
defaulteflect what they were doing and the market rate.  Their pay was upgraded, and rightly so, but nobody has paid any attention to mine, which is one of the key reasons why I'm now looking for a job with better pay and conditions.  Having said that, I believe 
defaultsome CEO pay is too high, and I know of larger charities where the senior team awards itself a higher percentage annual rise than the rest of the staff.  That's just not acceptable.  And now that times are tougher, I would need to know that my lowest paid 
defaultstaff are on an appropriate salary before accepting any raise.  There needs to be a balance, so that people are appropriately rewarded for their skills and energy, but proportionately, given that we're charities.”
default&#xa0;
default“Think the whole debate about CE pay is a
default storm in a tea cup. Too London and National charity focused. Does not affect 90% of VCS.”
default&#xa0;
default“CEO has 'reduced' hours in theory but not in practice to take a lower salary.”
default&#xa0;
default“I think it should be stressed that Charity CEO is an incredibly broad category, in
default terms of scale, remit, etc. We would not discuss "Catering industry CEO's pay" and group the CEO of McDonald's along with someone running a small cake shop (though perhaps we should!).     It seems odd that there is such a prejudice against paying Charity
default CEO's well for their work leading organisations focused on helping society.”
default&#xa0;
default“They are mostly not worth it.”
default&#xa0;
default“The amounts are becoming more and more ridiculous- the heart has gone! As long as 
defaultit’s
default a CHARITABLE cause big salaries should null and void! Majority of these "CEOs" are clueless and wouldn't be offered half the money in the private sector!”
default&#xa0;
default“The charitable sector is no different from private sector - eve
defaultrything from a market stall to T
defaultesc
defaulto and we can't generalise. Government can't make a strategic choice to contract out services to the sector and then complain about its professionalisation, slight conflict of interest here!”
default&#xa0;
default“All Charity CEO's pay should be made available to all current a
defaultnd prospective supporters of that charity so that can see where their donations are going.”
default&#xa0;
default“The salary should be entirely a matter for the Board. Much of public/media debate is uninformed. Why should charity chief executives be paid less than, say, senio
defaultr civil servants? There is a real risk to the sector that high quality individuals will be lost.”
default&#xa0;
default“We all need to take a hard look at pay because we can't afford to pay massive salaries. The gulf between rich and poor is far too wide. I have been a charit
defaulty CEO until very recently and was paid £40K. I have 2 degrees, more than 20 years’ experience and 10 years ago was earning 20% more than I am now. We all need to accept that working for a charity will not make us rich and more charities should move out of 
defaultLondon to avoid London weightings. We exist to serve, not to get rich at others' expense! We should lead by example and we
default can all take a pay cut.”
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default