BRC37
default&#xa0;
defaultSubmission from Paul WicksdefaultMy name is Paul Wicks and I have been a full scope electrician for over 25+ years and I work in the Domestic, Commercial and Industrial sector.
defaultI have seen a lot of changes over the years but since the introduction of Part P there has been a massive 
defaultincrease of company’s that have grown on the back of Part P.
defaultI was a member of an electrical scheme operator for 5 years from June 2008 to June 2013 and I was assessed once when I joined and then NEVER EVER assessed again and yet I paid my scheme fee’s eve
defaultry year which has an assessment fee built in.
defaultI have qualifications that were gained through a college course that was just short of 4 years long, I also have Inspection &amp; Testing and the current electrical 17
defaultth
default edition, this I feel is the minimum 
defaultstandard
default that an electrician should have to be classed as an electrician as with the years at college teach you the fundamental basics of electricity.
defaultOne of the massive increases I have seen is these 6 week courses that have flooded the market since Part P, this 
defaulthas to end before someone is seriously injured or worse killed as you cannot learn to be an electrician in 6 weeks.
defaultI have watched the government talks where you address the money making schemes that have ripped off genuine tradesmen for a long long time, 
defaultI feel it would be a better path to make to scrap all schemes and bring a ONE government monitored scheme that I know I would join, I feel that nearly all electricians would join this ONE scheme as the general public and tradesmen are confused by the vario
defaultus registers and schemes that have flooded the market since Part P.
defaultIn short get rid of the schemes and have one government monitored scheme.
defaultTo join this scheme you need to have all the qualifications that are needed with the core courses covered in a col
defaultlege at least one day a week for 3 years.
defaultIn the long run you will have qualified electricians carrying out electrical work. 
defaultIf the government were to make it a legal requirement to get the rental market to have their electrics checked every year like gas
default has to be then the safety will increase in homes across the country.
defaultThank you for taking the time to read this
default3 December 2013
default&#xa0;
default