LGP83
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultJane Green BA Hons Economics and Admindefault1. I am an independent economist and researcher and have made a particular study of incinerator PFIs. I campaign for Zero Waste and am a West Midlands ‘Green Leader’. In the past year I have spoken at the Zero Waste International Alliance C
defaultonference in San Francisco and to the European Parliament in Brussels in support of a petition concerning lack of community ‘Access to Justice’ in regard to waste infrastructure.  
default2. Summary Points
defaulta)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe drive to build municipal waste incinerators began abo
defaultut 15 years ago following the introduction of the Landfill tax which aimed to drive waste away from landfill which releases climate-changing methane gas. The amount of diversion from landfill thought possible 
defaultby 
defaultrecycling was just 25%.
defaultb)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSince then recycling
default has reached 42% in England and 52% in Wales with a welsh target of 70% by 2025. The waste hierarchy which prioritises prevention, re-use, recycling and composting, over landfill and incineration, became a legal requirement in England and Wales in 2011. 
defaultc)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultN
defaultearly all local authority incinerators have been built using PFI/PPP and because of the extremely high costs, often totalling around £1 billion each, the Government has been distributing 
default£3.5
default billion in PFI credits to around 
default28
default projects as subsidies.
defaultd)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHowev
defaulter the need for councils to build their own incinerator no longer exists as there is not only an overcapacity of UK ‘residual’ waste treatment predicted for 2015 but there is now a highly competitive waste market for all waste treatment including ‘end of p
defaultipe’ processes such as incineration at far lower gate fees.
defaulte)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe risks to council budgets of 25-30 year incinerator contracts has risen dramatically as it is the council who takes the risk of increases in recycling or future Environmental Legislation leadin
defaultg to unpaid or underpaid spare capacity.
defaultf)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultBoth DEFRA and the Treasury have a major involvement in a council’s decision to choose incineration and both have their own measures of Value for Money which are not in line with those of VfM for individual local au
defaultthority Business Cases. The Treasury is prioritising large infrastructure projects to achieve 
defaultnational
default economic growth.  DEFRA is agreeing 
defaultlocal
default VfM based on 
defaultnational
default targets limited to only 2020 and has not attempted to cost the risk of foreseeable enviro
defaultnmental legislation
default or
default recycling rates exceeding 50%
default.
default 
defaultg)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
default The NAO have now begun an investigation into DEFRA’s VfM guidance to councils with regard to incinerator procurement but this may be too late for those councils who are presently signing up to 25-30 y
defaultear contracts which involve unnecessary extra £millions from council budgets. 
defaulth)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultI believe it is vital that the DCLG step in now t
defaulto call for a moratorium for incinerator
default projects 
defaultwhich have yet to have contracts 
defaultsigned
default. This would
default 
defaultallow time to 
defaultdetermine goo
defaultd value for 
defaultmoney and whether the economic and environmental objectives of local authorities are being met. 
defaultBackground
defaultThis paper will argue that local authority incinerator contracts are being signed without due diligence in relation to whether they are
default (a) affordable; (b) represent value for money; and (c) 
defaultwill 
defaultnot burden the Councils with unpredictable costs in the future. 
defaultI
defaultn particular 
defaultit considers the assessment and m
defaultanagement of risk and argues that this
default is inadequate for 
defaultproject
defaults
default wi
defaultth a lifespan of
default 25-30 years which
default could therefore put future Council finances at risk.
defaultIncinerator project
defaults
default should be able to prove that they can
default deliver a commercial benefit to the Councils 
defaultover their
default 25 
default– 30 
defaultyear economic life
default despite
default 
defaultc
defaulthallenges 
defaultto 
defaulttheir 
defaultbusiness viabi
defaultlity 
defaultfrom
default an increasingly competitive waste market, increased recycling and foreseeable legislation which would restrict the types of waste which can be burnt. 
defaultFor adefault defaultcdefaultouncil a rigid long term incinerator contract represents risks which could be mitigated defaultby a more flexible modular system and by accessing the chdefaulteaper waste market. For the private consortium (Private Partner)default the contract represents an opportunity to ensure a high guaranteed income for default2default5default-30default yearsdefault,default whilst not having to face competition from defaultan increasingly competitive waste market. defaultFinancial Parameters
default1. 
defaultAffordability
default 
defaultCouncils 
defaultshould be
default satisfied that the additional cost of the 
defaultincinerator contract is
default affordable
default defaultin relation to:
default1. a)
default 
defaultCouncil Budgets
default The es
defaulttimated increase in costs for an
default incinerator above the existing waste budget, the ‘affordability gap’, will
default usually
default begin at 
defaultaround 
default£6 million p
defaulta
default. The total costs of the incinerator 
defaultare usually
default around £1bn. 
defaultA c
defaultouncil ha
defaults to state that the 
default‘
defaultlikely increases in costs’
default 
defaulthave been included 
defaultin
defaultto its MTFP. Given that most
default MTFP
defaults
default 
defaultare only for 3-4 years 
defaultthis measure cannot mitigate risk for a 25 year project. The risk to Council finances has increased since the financial collapse, with reductions to council budgets making even medium term predictio
defaultns of ‘affordability’ problematic. The ring-fencing of waste contract payments will necessitate greater percentage cuts to other Council budgets.
defaultSpare capacity and minimum tonnages
defaultAll potential new 
defaultincinerators
default 
defaultare being 
defaultbuilt with 
defaultexcess 
defaultcapacity and t
defaulto
default maintain commercial viability
default will need to sell this space at a price equivalent to the total cost per tonne, including finance and running costs of the plant, estimate
defaultd to be around £130
default per tonne. As 
defaultc
defaultouncil
defaults
default will be contracted to pay for 
defaultagreed 
defaulttonn
defaultage
defaults for the 25 year period,
default every tonne which is not used, or used for ‘substitute waste’ which needs Council subsidy, will effectively put up
default the price per tonne to over £13
default0.  This in effect acts as a ‘minimum tonnage’ imperative.
default2. 
defaultOpportunity Costs
default 
defaultAcc
defaultessing the waste market
defaultThe Opportunity Costs of incineration have increased dramatically 
defaultfor 
defaultcouncil
defaults in the past several years and even for those whose procurement began 3-4 years ago. 
defaultMSW can now be tendered on the competitive waste market far more cheaply (even for incineration or other ‘end of pipe’ solutions) and on shorter contracts than PPP new build. Best practice in waste management is also bringing the combined collection and di
defaultsposal costs down when recyclables, including food waste, are collected separately and the waste treated ‘per stream’.  
defaultThere has been transparency in waste treatment costs for the past 6 years with the publication of WRAP’s annual Gate Fees Reports
default whic
defaulth ‘
defaultpresents a summary of gate fees for a range of waste treatment, recovery and disposal options. The indicative gate fees reported here are based on survey information from local authorities, MRF operators, compost facility operators, waste management com
defaultpanies (WMCs) and other market intelligence’.
default The opportunity costs of not accessing the waste market are therefore now very clear with all treatments apart from landfill being considerably cheaper than incineration and in the case of recycling actually pa
defaultying councils. The information in these reports allows local authorities to make better informed decisions regarding waste ma
defaultnagement options but there is little
default evidence that the council
defaults use this information.
default 
defaultOvercapacity and falling gate fees
defaultAdrian Ju
defaultdge, now MD for Waste and Bioenergy at
default&#xa0;
defaultthe UK Green Investment Bank, has warned against the risks of an oversupply of residual waste treatment capacity, ‘
defaultTo properly assess the risks associated with finding the ‘right’ sort of substitute waste at this scal
defaulte requires a detailed understanding of the local C&amp;I waste market, and this comes at a time when funders have a lowered appetite for merchant risk’
default.
default 
defaultWaste is now a commodity like any other and one for which there is increasing competition in the UK and a
defaultt a European level; due in part to overcapacity of incineration
default and increasing recycling. All incinerators in the West Midlands area have spare capacity and older incinerators like Coventry which have the historical advantage of established waste supplier
defaults are able to charge around half the price which new build incinerators charge to remain commercially viable.
defaultDEFRA in their most recent ‘
defaultForecasting 2020 Waste Arisings and Treatment Capacity’
default 
defaultsuggests that 
default‘Spare capacity in EfW plants in Northern 
defaultEurope may tempt some LAs to exploit the relatively low gate fees there through short- to medium-term contracts rather than enter into longer-term contracts for investment in new capacity in the UK’
default2. (f) 
defaultOpportunity Costs of 
defaultnot following 
defaultBest Practice O
defaultptions
defaultThe
default opportunity cost of not following Best Practice 
defaultin 
defaultwaste management
default 
defaultcould 
defaultbe avoided by 
defaultthe 
defaultexamination 
defaultof best (and worst) practice across other Councils
default.
default 
defaultDEFRA does not 
defaultprovide
default fully costed case studies 
defaultof best practice 
defaultto enable
default councils 
defaultor
default t
defaulthe public 
defaultto
default make comparisons. 
defaultHowever
default,
default 
defaultEunomia Research 
defaultr
defaultecently 
defaultproduced a Report for a Council 
defaultprocuring an 
defaultincinerator
default. It gives cost comparisons taking into account changing waste management systems and accessing the open waste market. Instead of a 
default240,000 tonne incinerator, they estimate that
default&#xa0;
default£10 million p
defaulta
default would be saved
default&#xa0;defaultby simply diverting recyclable materials out of the PFI contract and onto the open market. By getting out of the contract altogether
default&#xa0;
default£20 million per year could
default be saved.
defaultA
default Wychaven
default District Report ‘
defaultValue for Money. Waste service comparisons’ 
default researched a comparable group of authorities and found that half of the authorities with high levels of recycling, including separate food waste collections, actually pay 
defaultless for their waste s
defaultervices
default. They compare Wychaven at 44% recycling with South Oxfordshire at 65% but who pay 10% less on collections. 
defaultThe Audit Commission’s document ‘Well Disposed’
default recommends that councils, ‘
defaultWork in partnership with WCAs where relevant, to ensure that was
defaultte management performance is optimised across the local area. This may involve supporting investment in new collection infrastructure in WCAs, where this could improve cost-effectiveness for council taxpayers in the long term’
default. 
defaultOften councils do not look
default a
defaultt the savings that could be made in combined disposal and collection costs
default.
defaultThere 
defaultis usually
default no 
defaultup-to-date 
defaultindependent 
defaultreview 
defaultundertaken 
defaultof
default 
defaulti
defaultncinerator proposal
defaults
default 
defaultin order 
defaultto assess the opportunity cost of best practice elsewhere
default or risk assessments
default, or
default to compare
default 25 year incinerator contract
defaults
default versus modular and more flexible options. This 
defaultis important because 
defaultthe 
defaultearly 
defaultproject weightings which 
defaultdetermine
default a choice of incineration 
defaultare 
defaultheavily
default weighted towards
default ‘technical’ and
default ‘bankability’ 
defaultaspects 
defaultand do no
defaultt reflect present day environmental concerns or employment and social dimensions.
default6. 
defaultDEFRA must agree Variation on VfM grounds.
default 
defaultDEFRA is being investigated by the National Audit Office in relation to its Value for Money Assessments for LA waste incinerati
defaulton plants.
default A decision by DEFRA to back a scheme and offer grants of millions of pounds is usually enough to convince a council that building its own multi-million pound incinerator is a good business proposition. However DEFRA’s decisive role in assessing
default 
defaultthe long term risks of changing waste legislation and technologies, management systems and markets in relation to costs and VfM is now being examined. 
defaultIn fact DEFRA explains its promotion of incinerator projects in terms of the short term National impera
defaulttive to meet landfill reduction targets by 2020
default rather than developing sound long term environmental and economic waste solutions for Local Authorities. As we approach the closure of the ‘waste treatment capacity gap’ by 2020 those councils singled out by
default DEFRA to get incinerators are left to face disproportionate risks compared to non-incinerator councils who are free to access short term contracts for spare capacity whilst developing newer, cheaper and greener solutions, accessing the waste market and be
defaultnefitting from the sale of recyclates.
defaultThe degree to which DEFRA performs an independent scrutiny function for incinerator proposals has been questioned in Worcestershire where there is no record of communication between WCC and DEFRA on issues 
defaultto do with 
defaultVfM. In fact the P
defaultroject’s Risk Matrix lists DEFRA itself as a risk needing mitigation: ‘
defaultSenior officers to ensure early and continuous engagement with key DEFRA officials throughout process 
defaultto ensure DEFRA buy in to scheme’default. 
defaultTreasury influence
defaultThe 
defaultTreasury’s influence over the type of waste infrastructure available to LAs is via the PFI and WI grants it allows DEFRA, its provision of infrastructure guarantees and its choice of a Private Finance system which is biased towards large inflexible infrast
defaultructure on long contracts.
defaultPFI projects have been described as ‘eye-poppingly’ expensive by Hereford MP Jesse Norman and member of the Treasury Select Committee. The Treasury, in its overriding desire for infrastructure projects (which are funded ‘off-bala
defaultnce book’) to stimulate ‘growth’ has formed an ‘
defaultunholy alliance’
default with the private contractors ‘
defaultwhich all but bypasses relevant departments in its drive to get deals done’
default.
defaultFollowing the multi-billion
default 
defaultpound bail-outs of PFI hospitals in 2012 the NAO has wa
defaultrned of the cumulative impact of funding infrastructure which is paid for from budget revenue. The Public Accounts Committee when criticising the ‘spend now, pay later’ approach of the Treasury stated; ‘
defaultWe were surprised to find that the Treasury did not hdefaultave a grip on trends in some key areas of risk or plans for managing them.default’
default 
defaultContractual Parameters
default1. (b) 
defaultBringing the Waste Contract into compliance with current and foreseeable legislation.
defaultThe OBC risk register for W
defaultorcestershire’s
default proposed incinerato
defaultr 
defaultis typical of other incinerator OBC’s when it 
defaultstates that if ‘
defaultthe councils significantly exceed their recycling targets
default [and] 
defaultthe plant is oversized
default’, it will be ‘
defaultan additional cost to the Councils
default’. A change in ‘
defaultthe calorific value of delivered residual
default waste’
default is also
default 
defaultstated to be ‘
defaultan additional cost to the Councils’. 
default The Councils are named as the ‘risk owners’ in the Risk Matrix for changes in legislation or guidance either at European, National or Regional/local level. 
defaultThese are very great risks for 
defaultc
defaultouncils who will be unable to respond to the rapidly changing waste world
default without paying the private partner
default to provide extra new waste services or infrastructure. This process has already been witnessed by WCC where Mercia’s 15 year old waste contract ha
defaults needed 56 variations costing £49 million in order to bring services in line with new environmental policy and legislation. 
defaultThe EU Waste Directive is proposing to ban the incineration of all recyclable and organic material by 2020
default 
defaultwhich 
defaultcould clearly resu
defaultlt in incinerators becoming economically unviable. 
defaultIt 
defaultappears 
defaultthat the recommendations of the 
defaultTreasury Select Committee
default that ‘
defaultPFI is only likely to be suitable where the risks associated with future demand and usage of the asset can be efficiently transfe
defaultrred to the private sector’ 
defaulthave not been followed.
defaultDEFRA, who are tasked with applying the trajectory of waste policy in relation to incinerator sizing for waste contracts, forecasts recycling rates peaking at around 50% in 2020 and remaining static for t
defaulthe next 25 years. This appears to contradict both reality and its own Waste Strategy for moving towards a Zero Waste Society. Wales is already exceeding 50% nationally and like Scotland aims for 70-75% within a few years. The Audit Commission’s document ‘W
defaultell Disposed’ states ‘
defaultaround 70% of household waste is readily recyclable’ 
defaultwhich is confirmed by the top performing councils in England who are now achieving around 70%. 
defaultIncinerator business cases are being passed by DEFRA without sensitivity analysis for
default 60 and 70 % recycling being carried out.
default 
defaultDespite being a prime example of infrastructure involving long-term commercial risk incinerator projects have not had either the academic research or governmental monitoring and oversight which other large privatel
defaulty funded LA infrastructure have received. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn contrast to the conservative predictions of DEFRA, and those parts of the waste industry wishing to secure incinerator contracts, the waste industry as a whole is gearing up to move its investment to the newer
default forms of waste treatment and sees ‘
defaultthe waste market is evolving into one with shorter-term local authority contracts and contracts based on specific waste streams across municipal and commercial sectors.’ 
defaultInvestment will come from ‘
defaultCorporate investors…, t
defaulthe GIB…, overseas buyers attracted to both the scale of investment and pace of change in the market and Private equity attracted to the growth potential in areas such as recycling.’
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default 
defaultComparing the cost of alternative waste treatment options
default.
default 
defaultWRAP Gate Fees Report 2013 
defaulthttp://www.wrap.org.uk/content/wrap-gate-fees-report-2013
default Judge, A., 
defaultDesigning for a changing 
defaultfeedstock suppl. 
defaultTolvik Consulting Ltd
default 
defaulthttp://www.tolvik.com/markets-and-data/Designing-for-a-Changing-Feedstock-Supply.pdf
default 
defaultResidual Waste Infrastructure
default Review
default. 
defaultEunomia Consulting. 
defaulthttp://www.eunomia.co.uk/product.php/113
default 
default 
defaultForecasting 2020 Waste Arisings and Treatment Capacity
default Feb 2013 revised October 2013 p 12
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/251567/pb13883-forecasting-2020-waste-arisings-131017.pdf
default 
defaultAssessing 
defaultthe feasibility of an alternative plan for waste management in Cornwall. 
defaultNovember 2012. Eunomia Consulting 
defaulthttp://www.st-ig.co.uk/files/eunomia_cornwall_waste_assessment
default_nov_12.pdf
default 
defaultWell Disposed
default Audit Commi
defaultssion 
defaultSept 2008 
defaulthttp://archive.audit-commission.gov.uk/a
defaultuditcommission/sitecollectiondocuments/AuditCommissionReports/NationalStudies/WellDisposed25Sep08REP.pdf
default 
defaultNational Audit Office to examine PFI EfW projects 
defaulthttp://www.nao.org.uk/press-releases/defras-oversight-pfi-waste-projects/
default 
defaulthttp://www.mrw.co.
defaultuk/news/national-audit-office-to-examine-three-pfi-efw-projects/8654270.article?blocktitle=Latest-news&amp;contentID=2186
default DEFRA 
defaultForecasting 2020 Waste Arisings and Treatment Capacity
default p 12 Feb 2013 revised October 2013
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/251567/pb13883-forecasting-2020-waste-arisings-131017.pdf
default 
defaultNorman, Jes
defaultse., 2011. 
defaultIt is time to derail the PFI gravy train
default 
defaulthttp://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/8267472/It-is-time-to-derail-the-PFI-gravy-tr
defaultain.html 19/1/2011
default 
defaultWatchdog fears for big projects
default Financial Times January 16 2013 p4
default. 
defaultTreasury under fire as ‘spend now, pay later’ tactic stores up a £200bn tax bill for the next generation
default The Independent  February 7 2012
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultTreasury Select Committ
defaultee 
defaultReport on PFI. 
default19 August 2011
default 
defaulthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201012/cmselect/cmtreasy/1146/114604.htm
default  
default£7 billion investment in waste 
defaulttreatment facilities to drive M&amp;A in evolving sector
default.
default Catalyst/LRS Spring 2013 
defaulthttp://www.catalystcf.co.uk/uploads/waste_report.pdf
default