BRC39
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence defaulton Part defaultP schemes from Electroworks LtddefaultSummary defaultPart P while a good idea has a number of fundamental flaws
defaultI believe that one body should be in place to
default promote the use of qualified electricians and to access the competence of electricians. This should be backed by strong enforcement of a much strengthened Part P or equivalent similar to the Gas safety regulations. This would ensure that the individuals d
defaultoing electrical work are competent rather than one person in a company and reduce the confusion of customers about what a qualified electrician is. 
defaultCommentsdefaultI speak as someone who with 40 years experience of electrical work who did not serve an apprentice
defaultship and recently put myself through one of the accelerated training schemes 
default(9 months) 
defaultto pass all the qualifications associate with being an electrician. This was to ensure that my knowledge and skills were up to date and that I could prove that they wer
defaulte. It is therefore very disappointing to now be in business competing with Joe from the pub who knows a bit about electrics and Fred who is Part P approved as a result of a five day course and a simple assessment. 
defaultI should also comment that while there wer
defaulte some very competent people on my course there were many who I would not let change a plug fuse for me
default and they managed to also pass at least part of the course.
default.
defaultThe person responsible for compliance with Part P is the householder but the majority of pe
defaultople I talk to do not know what Part P is. In addition there has been 
defaultvery little 
defaultpublicity about Part P and its requirements
default. 
defaultI think I have only been asked twice in the last three years if I was Part P registered despite a large number of domestic custom
defaulters.
default Some of my customers have been very concerned when I have told them I am going to inform Building Control about the work I have done. 
defaultI am not aware of any prosecutions under Part P apart from the odd one where someone has also done illegal gas work
default and a Part P prosecution has been thrown in for good measure. There does not appear to be any one who is interested in enforcing 
defaultPart P 
defaultand Local Authority Building Control will 
defaultgenerally 
defaultallow a
defaultn
default Electrical 
defaultInstallation
default Condition 
defaultReport (EICR) instead of
default a Electrical Installation Certificate (EIC) which is what is required under Part P. The EICR is not a substitute for an EIC as it impossible to inspect an installation completely once walls have been plastered, ceilings installed and insulation put in and
default the limitations on a EICR reflect this. 
defaultThe scope of Part P has now been reduced to the point where it is almost meaningless.  So given the lack of enforcement I wonder how many people will now bother. The introduction of third party certification is ru
defaultmoured 
defaultthat it is going 
defaultto be an inspection by a certified person who does not need to be an electrician but will merely have passed a simple certification course. 
defaultIf true t
defaulthis will of course mean that there 
defaultwill be
default n
defaulto need for Part P certification 
defaultas
default anyo
defaultne can do electrical work and then get it checked for very low fee.
defaultMy main concern is the competing Part P certification schemes have confu
defaultsed the issue about who is a qualified electrician.  Passing a simple open book C&amp;G exam, having the right equipmen
defaultt, passing a simple assessment means and paying their fee means that you are now a Part P approved electrician. How many applicants do these schemes fail? When a customer complains about poor workmanship how many are struck off? 
defaultHow many customer think tha
defaultt they are getting a qualified electrician as a result. 
defaultMy view and that of many others is that the Part P schemes are in it to make money and quantity is more important than quality.  
defaultOn a regular basis I see very poor quality and unsafe work done by DI
defaultYers, qualified electricians and Part P approved 
defaultcompanies so
default the skills and knowledge required to be an electrician should not be underestimated.  Looking at the internet forums where Part P “qualified electricians “are asking the most basic questions abo
defaultut electrical installations 
defaultI am astounded that they have the nerve to charge people for their work and do worry about how safe they are.  And these are the people who have the intelligence to realise they do not know what they are doing and ask for advice
default!
default Many people think that domestic electrics are simple and in the majority of cases they are right. But there are many instances where there is a considerable degree of complication where a wide range of electrical knowledge is needed to ensure that an ins
defaulttallation is safe.
defaultI believe that one body should be in place to promote the use of qualified electricians and to access the competence of electricians. This should be backed by strong enforcement of a much strengthened Part P or equivalent similar to the
default Gas safety regulations. This would ensure that the individuals doing electrical work are competent rather than one person in a company and reduce the confusion of customers about what a qualified electrician is. 
default4 December 2013
default&#xa0;
default