&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence fromdefault thedefault Ministry of Justicedefault              
defaultTRANSFORMING REHABILITATION: INFORMATION SESSIONdefaultI understand that, following our recent conversation, the Justice Committee Clerk has now been in touch with the Department to arrange an informal information session 
defaultwith the senior officials who are leading the Transforming Rehabilitation work. I am 
defaultpleased that you and your colleagues are able to take up this offer to find out more about our important plans for reducing reoffe
defaultnding through this 
defaultprogramme
default of r
defaulteforms.
defaultAs you are aware, the Transforming Rehabilitation Strategy published in May this year set out our plans for transforming the way in which offenders are managed in the community in order to bring down reoffending rates. The key elements of the 
defaultprogramme
default are:
default.
defaultFunding for the supervision of offenders makes up a sizeable proportion of the Department's budget, and we are faced with the challenge of trying to do better for less. We can either impose further cuts on the structures we have, risking increases in re-offending and leaving short-sentenced offenders without support after release. Or we can reform the system so that it provides more effective rehabilitation at a better value to the taxpayer, in a way that is sustainable for the future — and reinvest
default 
defaultsome of the savings in support for short sentence prisoners, an objective that has wide support. We can only do that if we bring in the best of the public, voluntary and 
defaultprivate sectors to work with offenders: it is the reforms in their totality that will bring 
defaultus closer to the important goal of a year-on-year, incremental reduction in re-offending rates.
default&#xa0;
defaultBefore you meet with officials in the Department I thought it would be helpful to set 
defaultout the progress we are making carefully, and systematically, to transfer from the 
defaultcurrent system to the new operating model in 
defaultAutumn
default 2014. I have set out below 
defaultsome of the key activities that will be taking place over the course of the next year 
defaultaround each key part of the reforms — this includes the work that is being undertaken 
defaultaround people transition, testing the system, and the Transforming Rehabilitation 
defaultcompetition.
default1 - Creating the National Probation Service and Community Rehabilitation defaultCompanies: Transition of Probation ServicedefaultThe 
defaultProgramme
default has been engaging closely with the leadership of Probation Trusts, including Human Resources leads, on the support that they need to transition staff to 
defaultthe new system. The 
defaultProgramme
default has established a People Transition Service (PTS) 
defaultto support this work and the PTS have had regular contact — both face-to-face and 
defaultthrough teleconferences - with Trusts about how the plans for moving people to the 
defaultnew system are progressing.
defaultWe are committed to giving Trusts all the information, resources and support they 
defaultneed to successfully transition to the new system. In November the staff allocation 
defaultprocess will be commenced in all Trusts and we will work with Trusts in the coming 
defaultmonths to clarify any issues relating to the allocation of both people and 
defaultinfrastructure to either the National Probation Service or the Community 
defaultRehabilitation Companies.
defaultThe 
defaultProgramme
default has worked with operational staff from Trusts to test the design of the future operating model. This has included testing the developing risk allocation 
defaulttool, the case allocation process and the Payment mechanism. We will ensure that 
defaultoffenders are clear who their Offender Manager will be by having a considered 
defaultprocess for transferring cases. The Department remains committed to continuing to 
defaultwork closely with Trusts to test key aspects of the new system. We have plans in 
defaultplace to roll out business readiness tests at key stages of implementation so that we 
defaultcan ensure we are managing the transition to the new system in a safe and 
defaultmeasured way.
defaultThis testing will support our plans for operational delivery to transfer from the 
defaultProbation Trusts to the National Probation Service and Community Rehabilitation 
defaultCompanies by April 2014. At this point all critical systems and process will be in 
defaultplace, so that in the run up to the Autumn we can focus on ensuring that, at the end 
defaultof the competition, providers will take on viable going concerns. We want there to be 
defaultcontinuity in the staff who are managing the caseload, continuity in the buildings that are being used and fully functioning ICT systems, which is why our focus during this 
defaultperiod will be on ensuring stability as the changes bed in.
defaultThe creation of the new National Probation Service and Community Rehabilitation
defaultCompanies by April next year is the first phase in a transition that will then continue
default 
defaultwith the award of contracts to providers later next year. We expect to see 
defaulttransformation taking place gradually, as providers then start to re-design services by 
defaulttaking advantage of the new freedom to innovate and bringing together expertise 
defaultfrom a wider range of providers. This phased approach to implementation means that we can move to the new system in a safe and measured way.
default2 - Opening up the Market to a diverse range of new rehabilitation providers defaultand introducing Payment by ResultsdefaultThe competition process is now underway, following the publication of the OJEU 
defaultnotice in September.
defaultWe know from our market engagement events that there is a high level of interest in 
defaultthe competition for offender services from a diverse range of providers across the 
defaultvoluntary, community and private sectors. As of mid-October over 100 
defaultorganisations
default have expressed their interest in competing as potential Tier 
defaultI defaultproviders, and of that number 70 have completed the registration process via our e-sourcing portal. It has 
defaultalways been our intention for these reforms to open up the market to a variety of 
defaultproviders. Bringing together the best of the public, private and voluntary sectors will allow us to draw on a broader range of expertise, with payment by results offering a 
defaultstrong incentive to improve upon existing service delivery. For our system really to 
defaultwork, I want, to see a whole range of 
defaultorganisations
default working to get to grips with 
defaultoffenders' life management problems, signposting them to accommodation, 
defaulteducation, or health services, or offering a mentor. The competition process has 
defaultbeen designed to enable bids from a range of 
defaultorganisations
default, including the voluntary 
defaultand social sector, and to enable genuine partnerships to be formed in order to tackle 
defaultreoffending. To support this, the Department is embedding good market stewardship 
defaultprinciples into the system so that there is fair, reasonable and transparent treatment 
defaultof all those involved in the direct and indirect provision of services.
defaultDue to the high level of interest and the subsequent number of clarification questions 
defaultasked by providers in preparing their responses, we have allowed potential providers 
defaultan additional 14 calendar days for their pre-qualification responses to be 
defaultfinalised
default, which must now be submitted by 14 November. The competition timetable remains on track, and the 
defaultProgramme's
default competition team and transition team are working 
defaultclosely together to ensure both 
defaultworkstreams
default are aligned.
default3 - Extending Statutory RehabilitationdefaultThe Offender Rehabilitation Bill, which is passing through Parliament and today had 
defaultits second reading in the House, extends statutory supervision for those offenders 
defaultwho receive custodial sentences of less than 12 months. The Bill will enable 
defaultrehabilitation services to be extended to this group of offenders for the first time, and 
defaultto start to address the high reoffending rates we currently see. It demonstrates to 
defaultthem that the Government is serious about giving them the support they need to turn 
defaulttheir backs on crime, while at the same time being clear there will be consequences if 
defaultoffenders choose to keep on offending.
default4 - Establishing the Through the Gate Resettlement ServicedefaultWe recently announced that 82 prisons will be designated as 'resettlement prisons' 
defaultso that providers can continue the rehabilitation work they have begun in custody into 
defaultthe community. Work is currently being undertaken by the Department to test the model in the North West. This testing will inform the planning for 
defaultreorgnising
default the 
defaultremainder of the estate in the New Year.
defaultAssurancedefaultThe 
defaultprogramme
default team has been working closely with the Probation Association, 
defaultProbation Chiefs Association, and with Probation Trusts at each stage of the 
defaultprocess, and we will continue to do so as we implement the reforms. We have 
defaultestablished a Sounding Board, which has been meeting since March, so that we can hear directly from Trust leadership.
defaultWe have developed a Business and System Readiness process for the 
defaultprogramme
default 
defaultto provide assurance that the restructured business, its systems and support 
defaultinfrastructure, including shared services, are ready to go live.
defaultThis process aims to:
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultEnsure that every aspect of the new service and the system reform being
defaultdeveloped are thoroughly validated prior to proceeding with implementation;
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultProvide the 
defaultprogramme
default and the business with the assurance that the system 
defaultperforms as expected in an environment that mimics implementation as closely 
defaultas possible;
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSupport the 'business as usual' function to ensure that structures and resources 
defaultare in place to respond to the reforms as required
defaultThe team are currently working with colleagues from Probation Trusts, MoJ and 
defaultNOMS and other stakeholders to define the criteria that will be used to test readiness 
defaultat each stage of transition. The team have developed these criteria with input from 
defaultthe Ministerial Sounding Board as well as discussions with a number of Probation 
defaultTrusts and practitioner groups.
default 
defaultThere is no doubt that this is a significant 
defaultprogramme
default of reforms, but one that we are 
defaultimplementing carefully, with the transition taking place in a series of phases. It is my 
defaultview that we cannot afford to not act now while reoffending rates remain so high. It is 
defaultalso my view that to delay these reforms would create more uncertainty for staff 
defaultwithin Probation Trusts about their future role in the system, uncertainty that I would 
defaultlike to avoid.
defaultI hope that this information will be useful to you and your Committee colleagues in 
defaultpreparing for the areas you wish to focus on during the information session with 
defaultofficials from the 
defaultProgramme
default and I look forward to hearing the detail of the areas that 
defaultyou discuss.
default&#xa0;defaultNovember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default