&#xa0;
defaultWritten submission from Charles defaultTanswelldefault (BRC 48)default&#xa0;
defaultThank you very much for giving me the opportunity to respond to your 
defaultcommittee’s call for evidence on the Building Regulations certification of electrical installation and repairs in dwellings.
default&#xa0;
defaultGiven the rather one-sided views contained in letters to your committee published over the last month, I felt moved to commit to 
defaultpaper my very high regard for the electrical competent persons schemes, and the efforts of the Electrical Safety Council (ESC) to raise awareness of electrical safety among the general public. As a past chairman and current member of the ESC’s 
defaultB
defaultoard of 
defaultTru
defaultstees
default, I am extremely well acquainted with their work, and indeed that of the whole industry, so feel well qualified to comment.
default&#xa0;
defaultSince its inception as an independent 
defaultcharit
defaulty
default seven years ago, the Electrical Safety Council has spent nearly £8 million on r
defaultaising awareness of the dangers of electrical accidents, and how to avoid them. This includes over £1 million given in grants to community groups throughout the UK, media and public information campaigns that have reached tens of millions of people, and po
defaultlicy interventions - like the one on Part P - which have helped ensure that consumers are protected from deregulatory, potentially dangerous, political agendas. Despite this tremendous effort they accept that public awareness of Part P is 
defaultnot as high as th
defaultey would like
default. However, the regulations have been in place for just eight years and information on home safety often takes many years to embed in the public consciousness. The ‘Fire Kills’ campaign has been successfully promoting the benefits of smoke alar
defaultms for over twenty years, and still campaigners tell us there is more to do to raise awareness.
default&#xa0;
defaultOnly this April, significant changes to notification and sign off requirements under Part P were made, along with the introduction of an improved code of prac
defaulttice covering scheme operators, which included additional stipulations
default 
defaultfor UKAS accreditation and public promotion of competent persons. I would urge you and your committee to take account of those changes, and the large body of evidence sitting behind the
defaultm contained in the Government’s impact assessment, before recommending any changes to the system which may once again create uncertainty among contractors and risk giving cowboys a fresh opportunity to trick consumers.
default&#xa0;
defaultI firmly believe that the steps cur
defaultrently being taken by 
defaultCertsure
default and NAPIT to create a single access point for consumers to engage electricians is a positive step in the right direction. However, I do not subscribe to the view that it is too easy to become a Part P accredited electrician o
defaultr that the industry doesn’t care about standards. The criteria for entry onto a scheme was recently raised by the industry to ensure those applying must have 
defaultNVQ 
defaultlevel 3 certificate at least, this would not have happened if the schemes were simply out for 
defaultfinancial gain. Moreover, the assessment processes and procedures of both 
defaultCertsure
default and NAPIT
default are UKAS-accredited, a mark of quality that is not easily won and which they must work hard to maintain. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAt the moment there are over 40,000 electricians regist
defaultered by the Part P competent persons schemes, the vast majority of whom have not provided evidence to this inquiry and thus, it must be assumed, see no immediate imperative to change the present Part P arrangements. Given this, it would be a pity if the vi
defaultews of the small 
defaultvociferous 
defaultminority of contractors who have written to you to express their dissatisfaction are given precedence in shaping your positions. This is not to say that industry does not take allegations of malpractice seriously, and I understa
defaultnd that they have and are being looked into fully following the publications of evidence on 9 October and subsequently.
default&#xa0;
defaultI hope this evidence is helpful to you in the context of your inquiry, and would be happy to provide further commentary as necessary, 
defaultshould you wish.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default