&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSupplementarydefault follow up wdefaultritten evidence from defaultNHS Englanddefault (defaultLTCdefault0default116)default&#xa0;
defaultI gave oral evidence to the House of Commons Health Committee hearing on Management of Long Term Conditions on 12 November 2013. During that session I offered to send the committee a note on the definition of frailty in patients.  The National Clinical Director for Integration and Frailty, John Young, has kindly drafted a note.  That note is attached.
defaultNHS England will be continuing to work to ensure that there is greater understanding of the nature and importance of frailty and ways of addressing it proactively.
default&#xa0;
defaultDe
defaultscription 
defaultof frailty
default&#xa0;
defaultFrailty is 
defaulta distinctive health state related to 
defaultthe 
defaultageing process in which multiple body systems gradually lose their in-built reserve
defaults. 
default 
defaultThis means the person is vulnerable to dramatic, sudden changes in health triggered by seemingly small 
defaultevents
default such as a minor infection or
default a change in 
defaultmedication. A person with frailty therefore typically presents in crisis with the “classic” frailty syndromes of delirium (acute confusion); sudden immobility (stuck in a chair or in bed); or a fall (and subsequent unsafe walking). 
defaultThere is a strong evidence base that r
defaultapid (within two hours) 
defaultmedical assessment
default,
default followed by 
defaultspecific treatment and 
defaulta period o
defaultf supportive and rehabilitation 
defaultcare
default,
default is associated with improved outcomes (lower mortality; greater independence; and reduced need for long-term care). Much of t
defaulth
defaultis urgent care 
defaultresponse to frailty is
default currently done in hospitals by Geriatric Medicine departments (
defaultGeriatric Medicine is now the largest medical speciality in England). 
defaultFor example, there are over 640,000 hospital admissions for older people with frailty related falls each year. Increasingly
default,
default crisis 
defaultassessment 
defaultand management 
defaultof older people with frailty is being done in the person’s home (“admission avoidance”)
default. T
defaulthis requires 
defaultthe provision of 
defaultdedicated
default, well led,
default multi-disciplinary 
defaultcommunity 
defaultteams. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFrailty develops slowly over 5 to 10 years
default:
default so c
defaultould more be done to help older people with frailty before a health crisis occurs? 
default 
defaultOlder people with frailty 
defaultcan be readily identified and are usually well known to local health and social care professionals. They 
defaultusually have weak muscles and also often have other conditions like arthritis, poor eyesight, 
defaultdeafness and 
defaultmemory problems. This means that frail older people typically walk slowly, get exhausted easily and struggle to get out of a chair or climb stairs. They are therefore more likely to become dependent on others for day-to-day cares and are at higher risk of future admission to a care home
default. At present, however, we do not formally “diagnose” frailty
default or identify it with a specific “code”. This means systematic case finding and proactive care is difficult. Slow walking speed is a simple test that could readily help identify people who are frail. Taking more than 5 seconds to walk 4 metres is highly indicative of frailty. The 
defaultprimary care electronic health record contains 
defaultlarge amounts of 
defaulthealth data from which selected existing items could be readily brought together to form a “Frailty Index” to identify the sub-group of older people who have frailty, and to grade the frailty state. This would allow a structured self-management plan for people with mild/moderate frailty and case management (multi-disciplinary assessment and individualised care planning) for people with moderate/severe frailty.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default