&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the City of London Corporation (CYS 0067)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThis letter responds to the recent invitation to submit written evidence to the above inquiry. 
default The City has witnessed a huge growth in the number of cyclists passing through the Square Mile and 
defaultthe widespread
default concern about the number of recent fatalities in Central London is shared by the City Corporation. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe City is engaged in a number of initi
defaultatives in the Square Mile aimed at promoting cycle safety. As in the rest of London, a large proportion of accidents in the City involve cyclist collisions with Heavy Goods Vehicles turning left. Operation Atrium, which is run jointly by the City’s Road Sa
defaultfety Team and the City of London Police,
default aim
defaults
default 
defaultto address this problem. 
defaultIts primary objective is to reduce casualties among vulnerable road users – particularly cyclists – by raising awareness of potential hazards and promoting measures that can be taken to
default reduce risk, such as cycle training. The campaign is coupled with enforcement activity against traffic offences such as motor vehicle encroachment into cyclist advanced stop boxes, red light running and pavement cycling. 
defaultThe project includes a number of
default e
defaultlement
defaults to educate cyclists and HGV 
defaultdrivers
default about potential hazards, including ‘Exchanging Places’, where 
defaultcyclist
defaults
default who ha
defaultve
default been 
defaultfined
default for unsafe cycling
default are taken on an HGV to
default ex
defaultperience the view of the road from the perspective of the driver. Cyclists wh
defaulto attend have their fines
default cancelled.
default The City’s own fleet vehicles have been fitted with sensors that can alert the driver to the presence of a cyclist in the driver’s blind spot.  
default&#xa0;
defaultAdditionally, the City is running roadside campaigns targeted on accident
default hotspots to promote safe road use. Information on cycle safety is handed out together with equipment such as high visibility clothing for cyclists and Fresnel lenses that enhance HGV drivers’ awareness of the areas around their vehicles. Extra cycle safet
defaulty education is provided through monthly presentations 
defaultin local businesses
default, and at primary schools in the City through the 
defaultBikeability
default programme. 
default&#xa0;
defaultChanges to the City’s roads are also
default being made to
default improv
defaulte
default cycle safety. The City recently adopt
defaulted a 20mph sp
defaulteed limit on all
default its roads, excluding those run by 
defaultTfL
default (over which the city does not have jurisdiction
default. Work is also being 
defaultundertaken
default to change the layout of the roads and markings to encourage safer behaviour on the part of cyclists and motorists.   
default&#xa0;
defaultI 
defaulthope this background is useful and if you have any further questions on this issue, please do get in touch.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default