&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Harriet Harman (CYS0073)
defaultI’m very pleased that you are 
defaultholding 
defaultthis inquiry
default into cycle safety and I’d like to take the opportunity to
default set out my concerns and 
defaultproposals for change
default.
default It is an issue of great concern to people in my constituency of Camberwell and Peckham who use cycling for work and leisure
default,
default and was especially brought
default to light o
defaultn the 17
defaultth
default November
default by the tragic death of a 
defaultcyclist in 
defaultCamberwell 
defaultwho was 
defaulthit by a lorry at 
defaultthe
default junction 
defaultof
default Albany 
defaultRoad 
defaultand Camberwell Road. 
defaultRichard Muzira was the sixth cyclist to die on London’s roads within a fortnight. First and foremost h
defaultis death is a tragedy for his family and friends but six deaths in the same month is a warning sign that we must do something to protect cyclists.
defaultSafe cycling is good healthy exercise, is cheaper than public transport and cuts congestion and pollution. Go
defaultods need to be delivered in London 
defaultand that means having lorries and HGV’s on our roads alongside cyclists and other road users. 
defaultCyclists will sometimes make decisions on the road that are risky for themselves and also for pedestrians – jumping red lights
default, not signalling, or moving across fast-moving traffic in an unexpected way. But we can’t solve the problem of cycling safety by blaming cyclists. Nor should we stigmatise all lorry drivers. What we need is sensible, evidence based solutions.
defaultI strongly ba
defaultck Southwark Council’s call for a ban on HGV’s for one hour during the morning and evening rush hours – a ‘safe cycling hour’ without lorries on the roads. 
defaultOne in five cyclist deaths involve lorries even though lorries are only 6% of traffic on the roads. 
defaultFourteen cyclists have died this year; nine involved with 
defaultlorries or 
defaultHGV’s. 
defaultI’m concerned to hear that some people are no longer cycling to work because of concern for their safety. 
defaultA rush hour lorry ban would give confidence to people who are not cycling 
defaultnow because of their safety
default.
defaultI also support 
defaultLabour’s proposal for a voluntary HGV Safety Charter. 
defaultThe charter w
defaultould
default require HGV operators to sign up to a range of safety measures. By the middle of next year, we want to see all new and existing HGVs fitted with safety measures including rear-view cameras, reversing alarms and day time running lights. 
defaultI think it would b
defaulte a good idea that b
defaulty the end of 2017
default all
default HGVs 
defaultare 
defaultfitted with in-cab warning systems for drivers, side
default-
defaultguards and blind-spot elimination devices. The voluntary charter is an immediate step that w
defaultould
default be backed up by legislation making these safety measure
defaults compulsory for HGVs, if Labour wins the next election.
defaultI hope that your inquiry and report will be important for encouraging and helping cyclists, and making sure they don’t have to pay with their lives.
defaultDecember 2
default013
default 
default&#xa0;
default