&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence 
defaultfrom
default Luke Bonell 
default(
defaultCYS0074)
default1. My experience is limited to London so these points can only relate to here.
default2. Travel by 
defaultbicycle will become safer the more people do it.
default3. The way to increase cycle participation is not to emphasise how dangerous it is, having the police stop cyclists and tell them they should wear helmets and high vis jackets is counter productive.
default4. The s
defaultafest cycling cities are ones where cycling is normal, all drivers know someone who rides, and there is no them and us culture.
default5. Although segregated cycle lanes are great (they have to be wide enough for at least two riders next to each other) they are n
defaultot the only way- with a four lane road like the strand it would be much more cycling friendly if for example the left two lane were reserved for buses and cyclist going both ways, and the right two lane for cars (this works because there is a central barri
defaulter)
default6. Cyclists need at least equal representation within official TFL groups as other interest parties such as taxis, otherwise vested interests will stop such relatively cheap and easy fixes being implemented.
default7. Cycle super high ways are useless if cars
default are allowed to park in them, or if there is not enough road space so buses have to block them.
default8. Contraflows designed to ease traffic flow are extremely bad for cyclists, as they usually are blocked with stationary traffic that uses all the available spa
defaultce, forcing the rider to weave in and out.
default9. Bus drivers are among the most aggressive toward cyclists. It should be made easier to identify specific drivers (maybe a how am I driving style number on the back) and a complaints procedure put in place with 
defaulta three strikes and out policy.
default10. The most important step is to give cycling groups a voice in road design, at least proportional to the amount of journeys made by bike (or the amount of journeys you would like to see made by bike)
default11. In a perfect world
default the cycling proficiency test would be a required module in the standard driving test.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default