&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence 
defaultfrom
default Michael Flint
default (CYS0076)
defaultI do not officially represent anyone other than myself but I would like to think I represent everyone who wants to live in a wholly better country.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1. I do not live in England. I currently live in Amsterdam, Netherlands. I was, however, born in the UK and I am considering retu
defaultrning to the UK. Aside from 
defaultot
defaulther 
defaultreasons not to return to the UK, after
default living in Amsterdam, cycling has emerged as one of the more prominent
default. 
default2. It would be naïve of me to claim that cycling is perfect in Amsterdam. On average 6 people die cycling every year. 
defaultConsider that fact 
defaulti
defaultn tandem (unintentional joke) to
default the fact that 57% of Amsterdammers use a bike daily
default and it doesn’t seem so big
default. 
default38% of traffic movement in the city is by bike compared to 37% by car and 25% by public transport. In the city centre, 57% of traffic movement 
defaultis by bike.
default Nobody wears bike helmets because they justifiably don’t feel in any danger. Pregnant women cycle
default, OAPs cycle 
defaultand parents cycle with their children. This is not just a city/country where cycling is made safer by the government through clearly s
defaulteparated/raised cycle paths. It’s not just the fact that cyclists have right of way over cars at many junctions. It’s not just the fact that cyclists have their own traffic lights. Amsterdam and the Netherlands as a whole 
defaultrepresent a culture of cycling
default. Tr
defaultansport=bike. 
default3. A cycle culture is better for everyone. It’s better for the environment. It’s better for the nation’s physical health. It’s better for natio
defaultnal wellbeing. In my mind it’s i
defaultndisputably a better way of living. Cycling makes people happy and
default is a key ingredient in positive society.  
default 
default&#xa0;
default4. So one of the reasons I don’t want to return to the UK is not just because I’m afraid of cycling in my capital city but because I believe that the UK’s failure to embrace cycling is symptomatic of many of it
defaults other unpleasant features. An investigation into cycling should be more than an investigation into how to make cycling safer, it should be an investigation into how British culture can accept and raise cycling as one of its many positive attributes. 
default5.
default In the short term, don’t be proud. Go and talk to Denmark, go and talk to the Netherlands, Go and talk to Sweden. These countries know what they’re doing
default to a far far greater extent than we do
default. It will NOT be difficult to get an education in how to improv
defaulte. Saving lives is the primary concern and these 
defaultcountries will help. The long term is harder to advise on. It will take time to create a culture of cycling such as is the current state in the Netherlands but making cycling safer can’t be a bad place to st
defaultart. 
default&#xa0;
default6. My presumption is this. The people who really control city hall will not allow a real revolution in cycling. While an increase in cycling decreases profit for companies blindly holding onto the power and money that doesn’t nourish them in any wor
defaultthy way we will not have a revolution. If someone can convince BP to give up on the gas and invest in some second hand bikes there might be a more positive future for us.
default&#xa0;
defaultDe
defaultcember 2013
default&#xa0;
default