&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Graeme Thompson [FBB0051]default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultFrom Graeme Thompson, Trustee of the Royal Television Society and Dean of Arts, Design and Media
default,
default University of Sunderland
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe North East of England 
defaultdeveloped a substantial TV and production sector between the late 1960s and late 1990s as a result of significant investment in local production by ITV Tyne Tees and BBC North East. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSadly 
defaultjobs and commissions started to dry up in the early part of the ne
defaultw century as ITV pulled out of its studio complex in Newcastle and focused production on London. Ofcom meanwhile agreed with ITV that it could pull out of its 
defaultregional programme production licence commitment. Jobs were lost and many media professionals wer
defaulte forced to move to London to find work. The BBC 
defaultmaintained its commitment to regional production with current affairs/documentary productions Inside Out and The Politics Show. 
default&#xa0;
default200
default6
default was a lowpoint for the region with the BBC’s decision to 
defaultend its long ru
defaultnning childrens
default drama Byker Grove – which had been 
defaulta successful training ground for performers and production talent such as Ant &amp; Dec, Jill Halfpenny and Oscar winning director Tom Hooper. In the same year
default,
default ITV dropped 
defaultits own long running North East-
defaultbase
defaultd drama Wire in the Blood.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is to th
defaulte credit of the BBC, that executives
default recognized the significance of the gap left by 
defaultByker Grove. Another childrens’
default show was swiftly 
defaultparachuted into the region
default.
default The Revenge Files of Alistair 
defaultFury ran for just one seri
defaultes and offered work to production staff who had 
defaultbeen 
defaultpreviously 
defaultemployed on 
defaultByker Grove.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe new team at BBC North
default in Salford
default – liaising with the local Royal Television Society and Northern Film and Media – decided 
defaultto 
defaulttap in to
default the region’s expertise in c
defaulthildrens’ pro
defaultduction by moving Tracy Beaker R
defaulteturns to Newcastle.  The decision was then taken to shift production of the 
default‘
default60s detective drama Inspector George Gently from Ireland to Durham.
default&#xa0;
defaultCBBC quickly built on that momentum 
defaultand brought new childrens’ d
defaultramas Wolfblood and The Dumping Ground to the North East. They join the BBC1 period shopping drama The Paradise 
default(filmed near Sunderland) 
defaultand ITV police 
defaultseries Vera (filmed in Northumberland). The BBC invested more than £1m in creating sets at Lambton Castl
defaulte for The Paradise. 
default&#xa0;
defaultNorthern Film and Media estimate these new television productions 
defaultcurrently 
defaultcontribute more than £6m to the production economy of the region
default - £12,700 a day in salaries, accommodation and equipment hire.
default&#xa0;
defaultDirector of BBC North Peter Salmon said he believed the success of the BBC move to Salford would be judged not on its impact around the North West, but on its ability to engage
default audiences and revive and develop programme teams in Yorkshire and the North Eas
defaultt.
defaultThe current level of 
defaulttelevision 
defaultpro
defaultduction 
defaultin the North East proves 
defaultthe BBC is taking that strategy seriously. The corporation is also investing in developing new writers and new producers with projects including Jesting About 
default- 
defaultwhich aims to uncover co
defaultmedy talent. One of the successes of that project is North East writer-performer Jason Cook whose BBC2 comedy Hebburn is into i
defaultts second series. 
defaultExecutives at BBC North are currently
default in discussions with Northern Film and Media and other partners about brin
defaultging further projects to the region.
default&#xa0;
defaultWithout the BBC, the North East television production sector would now be a shadow of its former self. It is the view of myself and many others in the region, that the BBC used its influence and resources to positively
default make a difference to a 
defaultproduction sector and programme-making tradition which had found itself facing terminal decline. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSeven years ago, 
defaultLondon-based 
defaultITV, Channel 4, Five and Sky were unable to 
defaultoffer the North East production se
defaultctor a lifeline. The BBC 
defaulthowever recognized the value of making use of experienced production teams and location managers. And further realized the positive impact on audiences of making television from this region of England.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis seems sensible and strategic 
defaultuse of the
default licence 
defaultfee 
default- which 
defaultof course 
defaultis 
defaultpartly made up of contributions from the two million people resident in households around North East England.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default