&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by TV Licensing Watch [FBB0054]defaultSummarydefaultRaise the issues:
defaultWhy 
defaultpeople in the UK 
defaultare 
defaultby law denied and deprived of access to live television programme services because they cannot afford to fund the BBC or do not want to fund the BBC
default.
defaultWhy
default people in the UK are by law subject to legal sanction in UK courts because they cannot afford to fund the BBC or do not want to fund the BBC.
defaultWhy people in the UK are denied the right to exercise personal choice of 
defaultwhether or not to 
defaultfund the BBC
default as a norm
defaultal private purchasing decision.
defaultIntroductiondefaultTV Licensing Watch 
defaultare 
defaultprivate individuals who 
defaultmonitor
default, blog
default and report on issue
defaults concerning BBC tv licence, 
defaultthe realities of BBC 
defaultlicence enforcement activities and 
default victims of the BBC tv licence enforcement reg
defaultime
default.
default  
defaultA
defaults a consequence of the experiences of what
default we do we want to persuade Parliament that it is no longer appropriate that the BBC 
defaultnor anyone else 
defaultis funded by an enforced 
defaultbroadcast receiving
default licence regime.  That there must no longer be any criminal or
default civil sanction used against people who cannot afford to or do not want to fund the BBC.  Bring a permanent end of 
defaultthe by 
defaultdenial of access 
defaultby law 
defaultto live television programme services because people in the UK cannot afford to or do not want to fund the 
defaultBBC.
default To end any form of enforced broadcast receiving licence regime.
defaultHow should the BBC be funded beyond 2016? default1
defaultIn 2012, on behalf of the BBC, Capita TV Licensing brought 181,880 prosecutions and secured 155,135 convictions for tv licence evasion.  The n
defaultumber of prosecutions and convictions for tv licence evasion have been increasing year on year and for many years and show no sign of decline.  The figures speak for themselves.  It has become increasingly evident that this increasing trend has been going 
defaulton for far too long and cannot be allowed to continue after 2016.
default  Arguably, there are as many reasons for people no having tv licences as there are people who are unlicensed.  However, the point has to be made that prosecuting and convicting people who ca
defaultnnot or do not want to fund the BBC
default cannot be allowed to continue.  
defaultAny pretence that enforcement activities carried out by Capita TV Licensing on behalf of the BBC in any way detect, prevent or reduce the “crime” of tv licence evasion have long since been
default exposed as false.  According to the BBC’s own figures approximately 3 million letters of varying degrees of threat are sent to unlicensed addresses each and every month.  That is approximately 2.6 million more unlicensed addresses than there are “no licen
defaultce needed” declarations.  If the BBC are to be believed there are approximately 400,000 “no licence needed” declarations on record.
default   
default2
defaultThere are as many reasons for addresses being unlicensed as there are unlicensed addre
defaultsses.  However, may we
default suggest th
defaultat a significant reason for the huge discrepancy between unlicensed addresses and no licence needed declarations is the simple fact that people just cannot be bothered
default with the BBC and its broadcast receiving licence
default any longer.  They have made what amount
defaults to a private purchasing decision in the audio-visual broadcast market and decided that they no longer want to or need to fund the BBC.
default  People seem to have decided that what they do in the privacy of their own homes is no business of the BBC or Capita TV
default 
defaultLicensing.
default  People are voting with their viewing habits, 
defaultpurchasing decisions, 
defaultwallets and purses and turning their backs on the BBC and the BBC broadcast receiving licence regime.  People are rejecting the BBC and no amount of BBC enforcement 
defaultby Capita T
defaultV Licensing 
defaultwill change it and seeking to criminalise people or subject people to a civil enforcement regime for what amounts to a private buying decision 
defaultfor
default products and 
defaultservice
defaults
default consumed 
defaultin 
defaultthe privacy
default and intimacy of
default their own homes 
defaultby people in an 
defaultexpanding audio-visual media market in which the BBC has a declining share is plainly absurd.
default3
defaultThere is no 
defaultlogical 
defaultreason why people in the UK should deprived of 
defaultand denied 
defaultaccess to all live television programme services on the bases that they cannot aff
defaultord to fund the BBC and or 
defaultthat 
defaultthey do not want to fund the BBC.  
defaultMay we point out that people who purchase products advertised on television have in essence paid to watch the commercial television channels concerned as those channels are funded through a
defaultdvertising revenues.  Under the present BBC tv licence regime people who have thus alr
defaulteady paid in advance to watch/
defaultrecord live commercial television programme services are denied access by law to those services that they have already paid
default for if they cann
defaultot afford to or
default do not want to fund the BBC.  
defaultThere is definitely no reason why
default 
defaultsuch private purchasing decisions for services consumed in the privacy of the home should be the subject of sanction whether through criminal e
defaultnforcement or civil enforcement f
defaultor that matter.
default4
defaultProposals to decriminalise non-payment of the BBC broadcast receiving licence by introducing a system of civil enforcement 
defaultrecently introduced in the House of Lords 
defaultseem to 
defaultus
default to be as
default fundamentally flawed and as
default nonsensical as the contin
defaultuation of the BBC broadcast receiving licence. For example, parking was decriminalised and made subject to civil enfor
defaultcement 
defaultand the number of penalty charge notices issued by civil enforcement officers employed by private enforcement companies contracted 
defaultby local councils increased exponentially with concomitant increase
defaults
default in the number of complaints about indiscriminate, vexatious and petty issuing of penalty charge notices for financial gain
default as well as the terroristic follow-up activities of bailiffs seek
defaulting payment
default.  
default5
defaultThe main reason why penalty charge notices for non-payment of the BBC broadcast receiving licence are unacceptable is simple.  The activity of watching and or recording 
defaultlive television programme services takes place in the privacy of peopl
defaulte’s homes.  Making what goes on in the privacy of people’s homes
default, 
defaultthe 
defaultwatching and recording of audio-visual media the 
defaultsubject of a civil enforcement regime is inappropriate, disproportionate and grossly intrusive for what is really a petty infraction
default conc
defaulterning a private contractual matter
default to supply
default between customer and 
defaultlive television programme 
defaultservice provider
default.  
default6
defaultAs intimated 
defaultby the DCMS 
defaultSelect Committee 
defaultrequest for submissions, the audio-visual media market has burgeoned with a huge variety of platfor
defaultms which currently fall outside the scope of the BBC broadcast receiving licence.  Arguably, those audio-visual media platforms currently outside the scope of the BBC broadcast receiving licence should continue to remain outside the scope of the BBC broadc
defaultast receiving licence
default if the BBC broadcast receiving licence were to continue
default. The reason is very simple, 
defaultdespite the obligations set out in the Charter, 
defaultthe BBC played 
defaultlittle or 
defaultno part in the 
defaultfinancing, 
defaultdevelopment and content of such unlicensable audio-
defaultvisual media platforms
default which numerically far outnumber BBC channels.
default  With the plethora of audio-visual platforms now available people are free to pick and choose where they source their public service content from.  There is no longer any rational argumen
defaultt to restrict public service content 
defaultto the BBC and have an enforced
default private hypothecated television access tax 
defaultlevied by and 
defaultpayable only to the BBC to fund it.  However, any form of enforced television or live television programme service provider licensing regime is 
defaultno longer acceptable 
defaultin our view 
defaultand the UK should follow Australia’s example and abolish any form of enforced b
defaultroadcast receiving licensing.
default7
defaultHowever, numerically outnumbering the BBC 
defaultin 
defaultthe way that they do, private channels offering unlicensable audio-visual content to the overall 
defaultmedia 
defaultmarket 
defaultin the UK 
defaultcomplain vociferously and with some justification that the 
defaultrevenues that the BBC are guaranteed through the combination of BBC broadcast receiving licence, taxpayer funding via The Treasury for various BBC broadcast receiving licence concessions (over 75, blind) in addition to the revenues of the BBC’s commercial 
defaultactivities through BBC Global and BBC Worldwide lead to the BBC structurally dominating and distorting the wider media markets 
defaultand production facilities 
defaultwithin the UK.
default8
defaultThere are 
defaultfour basic 
defaultmodel
defaults to fund the BBC: tv licence revenue with merchandising, fo
defaultrmat and content revenues (the current model): advertising, format, content and merchandising revenues only: voluntary subscription with format, content and merchandising revenues: combination of advertising, subscription, format, content and merchandising
default revenues
default.
default9
defaultAlthough it is not widely known, John Reith, first BBC Director General was against the BBC being funded through licensing revenue.  
defaultIn 1922, 
defaultJohn Reith preferred voluntary subscription and had no fundamental objection to the BBC 
defaultbroadcasting advertisements and 
defaultreceiving advertising 
defaultrevenue. However, 
defaulthe believed
default, wrongly as
default 
defaultit turned out, that
default no company would be prepared to pay the advertising rates the BBC could 
defaultdemand and 
defaultcommand.  
defaultHowever, Reith disliked
default the BBC licence revenue model and argued with the Postmaster General who did not believe that the Post Office should be in the business of collecting mere subscriptions. 
defaultReith was overruled and t
defaulthe BBC broadcast receiving licence was created 
defaultas a conseque
defaultnce 
defaultand
default although fundamentally flawed and regressive
default 
defaultfor the reasons John Reith cited in 1922 
defaultthe BBC broadcast receiving licence 
defaultis still current.
default10
defaultIn our opinion, and in this 
defaultsubmission 
defaultas with many other submissions from private 
defaultparties
default it can be diff
defaulticult to separate opinion from fact in the matter of how the BBC s
defaulthould be funded post-2016, in our
default opinion the BBC should be funded by voluntary subscriptions paid by people who want to 
defaultfund the BBC.  We
default believe that people must have the right to exercise
default their personal choice in making a private buying decision in the wider audio-visual media market.  If the BBC need to or want to supplement subscription revenues with other revenues from advertising, placement, content and format licensing and merchandisi
defaultng then they should be commercial decisions made by a fully privatised media company and be the subject and consequences of market forces alone.  In other words, that is the 
defaultBBC should become a private commercial concern 
defaultwith business development its
default only
default 
defaultcommercial concern
defaults
default.  Whether the individual potential subscriber buys into the BBC and its 
defaultproducts, 
defaults
defaultervices
default and commercial ethos
default is 
defaultthe free will concern only of the individual concerned and not the subject of 
defaultmonitoring and 
defaultcom
defaultpulsion through BBC 
defaultenforcement or indeed any other enforcement processes.
default11
defaultThe transfer from licence to subscription will involve huge restructuring for the BBC and I do not underestimate the task.  However, nor do I overestimate the task.  The task was not and is not beyo
defaultnd 
defaultnetworks and 
defaultservices such as Sky
default, Al Jazeera, Russia Today, Japan Satellite TV, and numerous others freely available in the UK 
defaultwho 
defaultsuccessfully 
defaultmarket their services and therefore exercise no compulsion
default but still 
defaultoperate viable, profitable media busine
defaultsses
default from
default and for 
defaulttheir customer base
default.  Nor was the subscription task beyond the mobile telephone service 
defaultoperators
default who are in state of permanent n
defaultetwork and structural changes.  If private media businesses can do all of th
defaultese
default structural strategic 
defaultthings 
defaults
defaultuccessfully 
defaultand still operate as viable businesses
default then so can the BBC. 
default 
defaultThe project would be on a similar scale to the ending of analogue services in the UK
default and may be fraught with difficulties
default.  How should the project be funded.  
defaultWe suggest w
defaultith the fina
defaultl year
defaults’ BBC tv licence revenue in 2015-2016 the rest of the BBC can fund itself th
defaultrough its commercial activities which
default,
default by the way
default,
default it already does and 
defaultapply to the City for
default 
defaultinvestment funds and issue shares to raise money for large scale proje
defaultcts the way any other plc would and would take the BBC back to its 
defaultpre-Charter 
defaultprivate business entity roots as the British Broadcasting 
defaultCompany Ltd.
default12
defaultIt cannot be any longer legitimately argued that people in the UK who cannot fund the BBC or do not wan
defaultt to fund the BBC should any longer be denied access to all live television programme services as a consequence.  The argument deployed against subscription funding of the BBC by willing subscribers was and is that subscription excludes those with the leas
defaultt money to be able to afford the subscription.  The fact of the matter is that people are already excluding themselves from the BBC and
default 
defaultall 
defaultlive television programme services
default in the UK
default altogether either through choice or 
defaultfear 
defaultbecause they cannot afford eit
defaulther the cost of the BBC tv licence nor the 
defaultfines, 
defaultcosts
default and victim surcharges 
defaultassociated with 
defaultbeing prosecuted and convicted for
default so called tv licence evasion.  Exclusion already 
defaulth
defaultappens
default under the present 
defaultbroadcast receiving
default licence funding model for and op
defaulterated by the BBC.  Were the B
defaultBC tv licence to scrapped, and we
default firmly believe that the BBC tv licence 
defaultand the Charter obligations cited and deployed as excuses f
defaultor the continuation of the BBC broadcast receiving
default licence 
defaultshould be scrapped at the earliest 
defaultopportunity, then people in the UK would still have access to live television programme services for which they would not have to pay a subscription for and not face the 
defaultfear
default of prosecution and conviction because they were unable 
defaultto afford to 
defaultor unwilling 
defaultto pay 
defaultinto 
defaultthe BBC
default and its
default 
defaultbroadcast receiving
default licence.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default