&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Phonographic Performance Limited t/a PPL [FBB0060]default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default1.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultPPL is the UK-based music licensing company which licenses recorded music 
defaultto be played in public or broadcast (including certain online 
defaultuses)
default.
default Established in 1934, PPL carries out this role on behalf of over 10,000 record company and 65,000 performer members
default,
default the majority of which are small businesses or sole traders. PPL generated revenue of over £170m in 2012.
default1.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultPPL’s broadcast and online 
defaultlicensing covers the use of recorded music on the BBC’s television, radio and iPlayer services and by hundreds of commercial broadcasters. These include ITV, Channel 4, Five and BSkyB, together with services such as Virgin Media and BT Vision. These licenc
defaultes often cover a range of new media uses of recorded music in addition to “traditional” broadcasts. PPL also licenses commercial radio networks such as Capital, Heart and Absolute Radio, online services such as Last.fm, and community, hospital, student and
default prison radio stations.
default1.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAs regards the BBC, t
defaulthe licence granted by PPL provides the BBC with the right to include recorded music controlled by PPL’s members within the wide range of services operated by the BBC, including its radio and television broadcasts and digital services such as the BBC iPlaye
defaultr. PPL also licenses BBC Worldwide for 
defaultvarious uses of r
defaultecorded music
default.  
default1.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultPPL welcomes the opportunity to make a submission to the Inquiry.  PPL notes the remit of the Inquiry and the questions set out in the Inquiry’s call for evidence. Many of the topics 
defaultcovered by the call for evidence are matters in respect of which, given its role as a music licensing company, PPL is not best placed to comment
default.
default1.5.
default&#xa0; 
defaultHowever, PPL can offer evidence in the form of its experiences of licensing the BBC (and BBC Worldwide) 
defaultover m
defaultany years, 
defaultpart
defaulticularly with regard to those aspects of the call for evidence which focus on the public purposes set out in the current Charter. PPL hopes that the information it is able to provide will be of some assistance to the Culture, Media and Sport
default Committee as it considers further the matters covered by the Inquiry. 
default2.1.default&#xa0; 
defaultThe BBC’s principal radio services broadcast a substantially wider range of sound recordings than equivalent commercial radio services. Not only does this contribute to its public purpose of default“stimulating creativity and cultural defaultexcellence”default, it also providedefaults adefault wider odefaultpportunity for new sound recordingsdefault and new recording artists to be heard by the public, which is important for the futuredefault health and success of the UK mdefaultusic industry.default2.2.default&#xa0; 
defaultThrough the international transmissions of its music radio services and the ddefaultistribution (by BBC Worldwide) of televisidefaulton programmes which include UK mdefaultusic, the BBC defaulthelps to meetdefault its public purpose of default“bringing the UK to the world”default and supportdefaults the global success of the UK mdefaultusic industry.default2.3.default&#xa0; 
defaultIn launching new digital services such as defaultthe iPlayerdefault (as an example of fulfilling its public purpose defaultof “defaulthelping to deliver to the public the benefit of emerging communications technologies and services”)default,default the BBC has defaultfavoured a collective licensing approach defaultand this has defaultpaved the way for PPL’s cdefaultollective licensing of similar services by commercial providers, thereby widedefaultning the scope of legitimate ondefaultline services in the UK. default2.4.default&#xa0; 
defaultAs a general observdefaultation, PPL notes that the BBC (defaultas a musicdefault user on a considerable scale) defaultdemonstratesdefault due respect for thdefaulte need to obtain legal clearance for the rights to use PPL’s members’ recordings.  It also observedefaultsdefault due process, with the licensing terms being agreed by way of robust arm’s-lengtdefaulth negotiations defaultand by reference to appropriate compardefaultators in the commercial defaultsectordefault, whilst always recognising that the BBC must make appropriate payment for such rights.default2.5.default&#xa0; 
defaultFor ease of reference, PPL’s comments below are presdefaultented under the headings of defaultpublic purposes from the current Charterdefault.default&#xa0;default3.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIn 
defaultPPL’s experience
default,
default the BBC 
defaultgenerally 
defaultmakes use of a wider range of different sound recordings than equivalent commercial 
defaultbroadcasting 
defaultservices. 
default3.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThis is based on the reporting information provided by PPL’s broadcasting licensees.  
defaultIn order to appropriately 
defaultdistribute royalties to its members, PPL requires its licensees 
defaultto 
defaultreport details of the 
defaultrecordings that have been used 
defaultunder their licences, 
defaultand the extent of such usage
default. PPL then pays its members 
defaultbased on this usage information (
defaultapplying the same methodo
defaultlogy whether the recording is owned by major record companies, independent labels or self-releasing artists
default)
default.
default3.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultBy way of example, 
default27,868
default 
defaultdifferent unique
default recordings were played on BBC R
defaultadio 2
default in 2012
default. This
default is significantly higher than the equivalent number on any commercial radio station
default in the same period,
default and
default can be compared to 
default1,375 
defaultunique recordings played on
default the Heart network of stations and 4,073 
defaultunique recordings played on
default the Magic network of stations. 
defaultIt is reasonable to assume that s
defaultourcing and selecting this larger range of recordings is likely to require investment of time and effort that is unlikely to be recreated by a service operating in the commercial sector. 
default3.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe
default BBC is also a member of PPL in its rol
defaulte as the owner of a substantial amount of commercial music. New music commission
defaulted by the BBC adds to the world-
defaultleading UK repertoire of music, particularly 
defaultin the classical 
defaultgenre
default. 
default4.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe UK is a net exporter of recorded music
default,
default adding to the UK’s balance of trade and helping to promote the UK and British culture in a wider sense. By way of example, 
defaultin 2012
default,
default 
defaultUK 
defaultrecordings
default made up 12% of the
default US recorded music 
defaultmarket and 
defaultfour out of five of the top selling albums in the US were from UK artists.
default4.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultPPL licenses
default the BBC 
defaultand/or BBC Worldwide for a number of international activities
default, which therefore form part of the revenue generated for PPL members by virtue of the popularity an
defaultd consumption of UK recorded music around the world
default:
default(a)
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSimulcasting 
defaultthe World Service outside of the UK
default (BBC); 
default(b)
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultI
defaultnclusion of recorded music within BBC television and radio programmes released 
default(i
default) as digital downloads
default-to-own (BBC) and (ii
default) for sale, rental or
default lending on DVDs and spoken-word CDs
default (BBC Worldwide);
default(c)
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultCopying recorded music within radio and television programmes for the purpose of supplying those programmes 
defaultfor secondary use by 
defaultother broadcasters; 
default(d)
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultBroadcasting recorded music within programming on th
defaulte international television channels operated by BBC Worldwide. 
default&#xa0;
default5.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultCollective licensing of rights in music and other creative content enables providers of new digital services to reduce transaction costs and invest in and operate their services with the confidence that rights have been cleared. 
defaultIn turn, t
defaulthis also delivers
default efficiencies and 
defaultfair remuneration 
defaultfor creators
default and copyright owners
default and
default,
default ultimately
default,
default a greater range of 
defaultlegitimate 
defaultservices and content for consumers.
default5.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe BBC has been an advocate of collective licensing 
defaultfor innovative digital services, such as the iPlay
defaulter
default. It has
default, on a number of occasions, been PPL’s first licensee in respect of new forms of 
defaultexploitation, simply due to it being the first to offer those new services and/or to seek collective music rights clearance for them
default. 
default This has paved the way for the
default collective licensing of similar services operated by 
defaultcommercial 
defaultproviders
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default