&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Channel 4 [FBB0067]defaultIntroduction
defaultThe UK’s 
defaultPublic Service Broadcasting (
defaultPSB
default)
default ecology 
defaultis extremely diverse and 
defaultdraws on a ran
defaultge of different business models, 
defaultand it
default is
default this diversity which has led to the UK becoming 
defaulta world leader in broadcasting, providing UK viewers with a wide range of high quality programming
default from a variety of 
defaultsources
default.
defaultThis 
defaultecology
default includes Channel 4 as a publicly owned not for profit organisatio
defaultn
default, 
defaultfunded entirely 
defaultby our commercial activities, taking no public money. Our not for profit status
default,
default combined with our 
defaultstatutory 
defaultremit and
default business
default model
default,
default mean
defaults
default that we automatically reinvest revenues back into the production of content and the delivery of our
default remit. We believe this is an extremely effective and efficient model which 
defaultdrives innovation and experimentation across the broadcast sector, as well as the on-going success of 
defaultthe
default UK
default independent production sector. 
default 
defaultThe BBC 
defaulthas an entirely different mode
defaultl being
default publicly owned and entirely funded by the British public through payment of the licence fee. 
defaultW
defaulte believe the continued existence of both
default these models of public service broadcasting
default, alongside the privately owned and privately funded models 
defaultoperated
default 
defaultby ITV and Channel 5,
default is vital to maintain investment in UK produced content
default and to ensure UK PSB remains the envy of the rest of the world
default.
defaultThe BBC, as the largest and best funded PSB, forms an important part of the PSB
default ecology in the UK and Channel 4 believes that a strong BBC is important for maintaining the strength of PSB in the UK.
defaultChannel 4 notes that the BBC’s formal charter review is due to take place in 2017. We plan to engage with that process and will respond 
defaultto any consultation in due course. The answers given below
default therefore
default represent 
defaultChannel 4’s 
defaulthigh level, initial thinking 
defaulton the BBC 
defaultwhich may 
defaultevolve 
defaultwhen we engage with the charter review process in more depth in the coming years.
defaultThe Purpose of PSB
defaultPublic 
defaultService Broadcasting
default (PSB)
default is the cornerstone of the UK media sector. 
defaultPSBs invest over £3bn/year in UK content and attract over half of all TV viewing. This 
defaultsignificant
default 
defaultlevel of investment 
defaultsupports the 
defaulthugely successful independent production sector
default as wel
defaultl as a strong in-house production force
default, nourishing creativity and enabling producers to take risks and try new things. This has 
defaultmade a significant contribution to the
default UK economy. The British independent production sector 
defaultis the envy of the world
default;
default 
defaulta
defaultccordin
defaultg to PACT’s latest annual television exports survey, sales of UK television programming totalled £1.224 billion during 2012, a 4% increase from
default 2011
default.
default 
defaultThe competition provided by the mixed PSB ecology 
defaulthas also encouraged increased investment by 
defaultother 
defaultcommercial broadcasters, for whom UK originated television is now seen as an important selling point
default. 
defaultPSB is also
default a cornerstone of British cultural life – whether through 
defaultimpartial news or access to high quality drama, comedy or documentaries. Channel 4’s
default unique remit ensures that it provides audiences with distinctive, innovative content that challenges established views and promotes new perspectives. 
defaultChannel 4’s commitment to championing alternative voices and fresh perspectives is exemplified by the hug
defaulte success of the 2012 Paralympics, which demonstrably changed British 
defaultviewers’
default attitudes towards people with disabilities. 
defaultIt is clear that UK PSB is a powerful force both for the economy as well as for social
default and cultural
default good.  
defaultThe difference between U
defaultK PSB and PSB found in other countries is striking. 
defaultI
defaultn some countries PSB content can be seen as dull, worthy or niche. This is a stark contrast to the UK which, thanks to the 
defaultdiversity
default of the PSB ecology, blends traditional PSB content with more commercia
defaultlly successful 
defaultcontent drawing
default 
defaultviewers
default, 
defaultand 
defaultenabling 
defaultPSBs 
defaultto
default experiment and 
defaultinnovat
defaulte
default 
defaultwith new formats and programmes. 
defaultThe foundation of PSB is universality and its availability on Free to Air (FTA) Digital Terrestrial Television (DTT). The ability for vie
defaultwers to simply plug their aerial into their 
defaultTV
default or buy a set top box and receive the full range of PSB
default content free at the point of use is vitally important and given Ofcom’s conclusion that no other platform will be able to deliver these key features in the foreseeable future (Ofcom measure this as 2030) it is absolutely vital that the DTT platform is sup
defaultported by government and allowed to continue to evolve and innovate.   
defaultClearly, as its largest player, the BBC is a vital part of the UK’s PSB ecology. As the recipient of £3.6bn of UK taxpayer money every year the BBC has a clear responsibility to delive
defaultr excellence, value for money and to always do what is in the best interests of the licence fee payers.
defaultScope of the BBC
defaultOutside of its specific mission and public purposes, it is important to look back at the expectations and prophecies being made at the 
defaulttime of the last Charter. It was said that due to the economic downturn and changing viewer behaviours TV (particularly traditional linear TV) would face particularly hard times and may even cease to exist as we know it. These prophecies turned out to be f
defaultalse, and indeed viewing of linear TV has actually risen, now standing at 4 hours per day. This is largely down to the continued investment from PSBs, despite the downturn, in delivering excellent content that consumers want while also continuing to develo
defaultp the DTT platform, developing a connected offering in YouView and making content available after original 
defaulttransmission
default on a variety of on demand services. The BBC, as the largest PSB, had a big part to play in this success.
defaultThe BBC has performed well in t
defaulthe current charter period and has delivered on its public purposes. 
defaultAlongside provision of high-quality content and services, there was demonstrable success in its 
defaultinvolvement in the Digital Switchover, for which a portion of the licence fee was used to en
defaultsure minimum disruption to consumers. 
defaultBroadly speaking, Channel 4 believes that the public purposes as laid out in the existing charter are the right ones, 
defaultbut 
defaultit is important that the BBC recognises its role in the broadcasting ecology, and that it 
defaultfocus
defaultses on 
defaultits own distinctive role and strengths, rather than 
defaultattempting to be 
default 
default‘
defaultall things to all people’. 
defaultIn 2010 the BBC strategy review laid out a series of core principles
default, which 
defaultincluded “
defaultdoing fewer things better”
default and maintaining distinctiveness. 
defaultChan
defaultnel 4 believes
default that the
defaultse are still appropriate goals for the BBC. 
default 
defaultThe BBC excels at things like 
defaultmainstream 
defaultnews provision and 
defaultoriginal children’s programming
default in ways that other broadcasters with fewer resources cannot, but there are clearly areas 
default(such a
defaults 
defaultreaching younger audiences or challenging established views) 
defaultwhere others 
defaultmay be
default 
defaultbetter placed than the BBC to deliver excellence and better value for money. 
defaultWhile PSBs
default are in competition with one another for viewers and in some cases for advertising revenue there are many cases where working together would enable greater investment in content and services for our viewers
default and greater value for money from the licence fee
default.
defaultChannel 4 believes that the BBC should seek to partner more with fellow PSBs especially in the case of developing technology and distributing content. The BBC spends many millions of the licence fee on research and development, much of which is focussed o
defaultn their online proposition and on the iPlayer while other PSBs also develop their own broadly similar propositions in isolation from each other. 
defaultWere the BBC to partner with other PSBs and share technology it would doubtless save PSBs 
defaultsignificant amounts
default 
defaultof time and money
default 
defaultwhich could be reinvested back into content budgets, benefitting viewers, the production sector and the PSBs.
defaultAs the largest PSB the BBC should also take a lead role in ensuring the continued strength of PSB across the wider ecology and s
defaulthould look to work with other PSBs to ensure the ecology as a whole can continue to flourish. 
defaultThe BBC should also have a responsibility to promote the availability of FTA PSB and ensure th
defaulte DTT platform on which it relies
default remains strong and competitive. 
defaultC
defaulthannel 4 believes that it is vital that the BBC’s role, functions and range of services are clearly defined and proper processes are in place to manage it. Broadly speaking the right framework for this is in place but it is essential that it continues to b
defaulte strictly applied.
defaultIt is also
default important that there are regular ch
defaultecks and balances to ensure that the BBC’s scope and scale remains appropriate and that the correct processes remain in place to 
defaultche
defaultck the impact of new services the BBC launches. This is 
defaultimportant
default both to ensure the effectiveness and value of the service and to ensure that they do not harm competition. 
defaultAs part of the process to review the effectiveness and value of their services the BBC should also retain the option of closing services w
defaulthich it does not consider to have been successful. 
defaultThe BBC is designed to serve the needs and interests of the entire nation, but occasionally this causes problems. The BBC could be accused of spreading itself too thinly, or attempting to be all things to
default all people. While appealing to the nation as a whole is a key part of the BBC’s mission it should not seek to serve the needs of niche groups at the expense of serving the needs of the wider population. This is especially the case where other PSBs have re
defaultmits specifically designed to cater to these audiences.
default 
defaultT
defaulthis does not preclude the BBC from focussing its attentions on reaching larger groups which are historically under represented, such as 
defaultolder 
defaultaudience
defaults
default or children. 
defaultAs the largest PSB
default, funded by licence fee payers from across the country, the BBC also has a responsibility to deliver nations and regions programming. The BBC is in a strong position to do this thanks to the breadth and depth of its in house infrastructure while Channel 4 
defaultis dependent on the strengths and weaknesses of the independent suppliers in each nation and region. 
defaultUnlike the BBC Channel 4 does not produce any in-house content. Instead we commission all of our content from independent production
default companies
default. This model
default has led to massive growth in the independent production industry 
defaultsince Channel 4’s creation, 
defaultwith Channel 4 effectively acting
default as an “angel investor” 
defaultfor production companies with a good
default idea. That idea is pitched to Channel 4 and then developed, in partn
defaultership with Channel 4, into a programme. 
defaultIn 2012 Channel 4 worked with over 
default450 
defaultdifferent independent companies, and invested £434 million in UK originated content (our highest ever).
default 
defaultI
defaultn 2010 
defaultOxford economics estimated that Channel 4 supported 28,000 jobs 
defaultacross the UK and contribute
defaultd
default £1.1bn 
defaultper year 
defaultto the UK economy
default.
defaultThe BBC currently commissions almost 50% of its content externally, also contributing
default to the growth of the independent production sector. 
defaultWhile any investment which strengthens the sector is 
defaultwelcome,
default Channel 4 believes it is 
defaultappropriate for the 
defaultBBC 
defaultto 
defaultmaintain a strong in-house production
default presence. 
defaultTo maintain the diversity of high quality content produced by UK PSBs Channel 4 believes it is important that the manner in which content is produc
defaulted by and for PSBs should vary with a healthy mix of both in house production and externally produced content
default.
default 
defaultThe BBC’s in-house production and development 
defaultcentre 
defaulteffectively 
defaultacts as a 
defaulttraining and development hub for the wider industry benefiting the sec
defaulttor as a whole, especially in the case of news production. 
defaultAnd as mentioned above it is vital for the production of nations and regions programming.
defaultFunding
defaultChannel 4 believes that the licence fee remains the most appropriate means of funding the BBC, but licence fee payers are right to demand excellence and value for money from the BBC. 
defaultUK PSB’s
default utilise a wide variety of funding models; from 
defaultpublic
defaultly or 
defaultpriv
defaultately o
defaultwned and commercially funded 
defaultto the BBC’s model 
defaultof publicly owned and public
defaultly funded. This diversity in models has been an important feature of the success of the UK’s PSB ecology. It encourages competition between PSBs while also allowing four to 
defaultexist, offering a range and variety of high quality content and services to suit the tastes of all audiences.   
defaultWere the BBC to shift to a commercially funded model it would be likely to negatively impact other commercially funded PSBs, and in doing so ha
defaultrm the investment in content that is central to the success of the PSB ecology in the UK.
default 
defaultAs previously mentioned in many cases the BBC is best placed to deliver maximum value for money for the licence fee payer but in many cases partnering with other org
defaultanisations would be beneficial. Channel 4 believes that
default were the BBC to 
defaultengage in considered partnership on areas where others have better expertise it 
defaultcould deliver an 
defaulteffective means of maximising the value of the licence fee. 
defaultGovernance:
defaultChannel 4 beli
defaulteves that a 10 year Royal Charter remains the most appropriate constitutional framework for the BBC. The certainty 
defaultthat 
defaulta 10 year charter provides
default,
default enables the BBC to take a long term, strategic approach to its investments which is unlikely to be possible 
defaultwith a shorter charter agreement. 
defaultHowever in a rapidly changing communications environment it would be appropriate to be able to make targeted changes to the Charter if and when appropriate.
defaultThe BBC’s current governance and regulation has come under incre
defaultased scrutiny in recent months and Channel 4 believes it is appropriate to closely examine whether the existing structure and mechanisms are still appropriate. The Trust is currently charged with being both cheerleader and regulator for the BBC and 
defaultthese d
defaultuel responsibilities often conflict with one another 
defaultso
default it is right that this is examined as part of the charter review.
defaultChannel 4 
defaultdoes not currently hold a firm view on the most appropriate governance and regulation mechanisms for the BBC but plans to eng
defaultage fully with the charter review when this process formally begins.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default