&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Foodservice Packaging Associationdefault&#xa0;defaultSUMMARY OF FPA RESPONSEdefaultThe Foodservice Packaging Association although not in favour of a compulsory charge on bags of any material is not opposing the proposal to apply a 5p charge to plastic bags. We however wish to exempt all foodservice outlets providing ready to eat food from a compulsory 5p charge on the grounds that not to do so will endanger the health of the public.
defaultThere is very powerful evidence that proves reusing bags to serve the public ready to eat food that is either unwrapped or partially wrapped will endanger the health of the public.
defaultThe majority of food made on the premises by food-to-go restaurants and facilities is either unwrapped or partially wrapped. It is not fully sealed.
defaultFood to go retailers use both paper and plastic bags.  The decision to use one or the other is a matter of fitness for purpose based on the amount and type of the contents noting the need to ensure contents are protected and that the risk of food waste is reduced. 
defaultThe dangers to the public by the reuse of carrier bags for ready to eat foodservice items is fully explained in the ‘
defaultReview of the scientific evidence on the food safety implications of the reuse of plastic bags
default’ by Professor DA McDowell FSB, PhD, CBiol, MBiol Professor of Food Studies at the University of Ulster submitted by The British Hospitality Association.  This evidence is corroborated by Dr. Raymond Wong of the University of Strathclyde.  The dangers of reusing carrier bags for ready to eat food is also highlighted by the Food Standards Agencies of both Scotland and Wales.  The Northern Ireland Assembly exempted hot ready to eat food from their charge.  
defaultCarrier bags used for take away food must be proven to be safe to use in conjunction with food.  This is a legal requirement.  Partially wrapped and unwrapped food will be in direct contact with the bag.  Therefore not all bags may be used for this purpose.
defaultThe major foodservice operators will not allow the public to provide their own carrier bag whether paper or plastic as the risks of contamination is so high.
defaultThe carrier bag is used to carry ready to eat food and drink away from the premises and the food is usually consumed from the bag.  Without a bag food and drink could be spilt and wasted.  The bag is also a useful container in which to place the packaging once the 
defaultcontents are used.  The carrier bag is therefore essential where more than one item is purchased 
default&#xa0;
defaultPurchase of food-to-go can be very much on impulse, a spur of the moment buying decision.  As the purchase isn’t premeditated it is very unlikely consumers will have a clean carrier bag on hand so the compulsory charge is unlikely to reduce the volume of carrier bags being taken away from foodservice outlets as we have seen in the food-to-go sector in Wales. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFOODSERVICE PACKAGING ASSOCIATIONdefaultThe Foodservice Packaging Association represents 150 UK Manufacturers and Distributors of single use packaging used to serve food and drink to consumers on-the-go.  Our members’ products are made from a wide variety of materials including, paper and board, plastics and wood. Single use foodservice packaging includes items such as cups, boxes, bowls, sandwich packs, sachets, cling film and bags made from a variety of plastics and various grades of paper.  This packaging has enabled the huge UK food-to-go sector to exist employing hundred’s of thousands of people and contributing a significant proportion of business rates.
defaultOur packaging plays a massive role in minimising product wastage and conserving resources as was stated in the recent WRAP 
defaultresearch 
defaultreports on wastage in the hospitality and foodservice sectors.  
defaultPackaging is a delivery system for products and consumers do not buy packaging but 
defaultthe packaging’s
default contents so that the amount of packaging such as bags in the foodservice sector directly relates to consumer demand.  
defaultThe primary driver behind the quality of carrier bags used is their fitness for purpose being the protection of the contents they contain and being safe to be used in conjunction with hot and cold food.  All the bags purchased by food to go operators must by law be proven to be safe 
defaultwhen used 
defaultin conjunction with food.  
defaultLITTERdefaultWe are concerned that the charge is proposed in the name of addressing litter.  
defaultLittering is 
defaultthe result of 
defaulthuman behaviour and 
defaultshould
default be addressed as such across the whole range of objects that constitute litter. 
default Singling out bags
default as a cause of litter 
defaultwhen so many different products constitute litter seems
default wrong 
defaultbearing in mind bags constitute such a tiny
default proportion of the amount of littering that actually occurs. 
defaultWe
default support 
defaultall
default steps to address littering behaviour 
defaultsuch as the Keep Britain Tidy ‘Love Where You 
defaultLive’ campaign but feel bags within the foodservice sector should not be 
defaultsingled out when there are no actions to address all causes of litter.
default  
defaultEVIDENCEdefault1. default‘defaultReview of the scientific evidence on the food safety implications of the reuse of plastic bagsdefault’ defaultby Professor defaultDA defaultMcDowell defaultFSB, PhD, CBiol, MBiol Professor of Food Studies atdefault the University of UlstedefaultThis paper has been submitted in full by the British Hospitality Association.  However we quote Professor McDowell’s summary of the review’s implications:
default‘
defaultThis review of scientific evidence has identified credible evidence indicating a potentially significant risk of bacterial cross contamination in relation to the use of reusable bags to carry food items. It confirms the capacity of foodborne pathogens to gain access to and persist on reused plastic bags, and to [re]contaminate high risk and ready to eat food items transported in reused bags. Most of the available information relates to the risks posed by reusable plastic carrier bags, as these are most widely used. However, the identified risks apply equally to all forms of reusable bags, including paper or cloth bags. Irrespective of the specific nature of such bags, the evidence clearly indicates that the reuse of contaminated bags is likely to increase the risks and the incidence of human food related disease.
default’
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would also highlight 
default3 specific issues raised by Professor McDowell:
defaultTake away foodsdefault are usually not presented in contamination proof containers. For example burger or sandwich packs are not sealed, to allow hot food to “breathe”. While there are no food safety problems with such items coming into contact with the inner surface of (effectively sterile) single use plastic bags, contact with the contaminated surface of a previously used (mutiuse) bag is likely to lead to the undesirable transfer of bacteria onto the cooling “ready to eat” product. 
defaultEating on the move default - defaultthe well established consumer practice of directly eating “take away” foods by hand “from the bag”  -  when that bag is contaminated, especially when consumer’s hands are very unlikely to be washed - will transfer contamination onto the fingers, onto the handled foods, and into the consumer mouth.
default  defaultWider recontamination and pathogen dissemination at retail leveldefault - defaultCustomers bringing their own contaminated multiuse bags into a retail environment run the risk of transferring “their” bacteria onto the hands of retail staff, and other retail food contact surfaces as the customer or server places purchased food into the contaminated bags. Food retail processes and premises have 
defaultstructural and operational safeguards in place to prevent their raw materials, packaging etc from cross contaminating cooked products. However, it is not immediately clear how a retailer could prevent such cross contamination at the point of service.  It should also be borne in mind that such contamination, once established at the point of service, is likely to be serially transferred to food items served to subsequent customers.
default&#xa0;default2. Corroboration of Professor McDowell review by Dr Raymond Wong, Lecturer in Environmental Health, University of Strathclyde – 9 September 2013defaultI have read the report and I am in agreement with Professor McDowell's opinion and conclusions in general. Although there has been limited research on cross contamination by reusable shopping bags, potentially risk of bacterial cross-contamination is present if reusable bags are used to carry both raw and cooked foods.
default&#xa0;
default In circumstances where multiuse bags are contaminated (through spillage, drip, etc.) and are not subjected to proper decontamination, under favourable conditions pathogens can survive and multiply leading to further contamination of subsequently purchased foods.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is an interesting point (Section 7.7) where Professor McDowell highlighted cross-contamination at the point of service if customers bring their own contaminated multiuse bags into a retail environment. Under the current European food legislation EC 852/2004, food premises should have a food safety management system in place based on the HACCP (Hazard Analysis Critical Control Points) principles. Unless this microbiological hazard – contamination and control measures are clearly identified and recorded in the control chart, it is possible that such problem can be overlooked.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the main, I feel that there is a risk of cross-contamination on the use of reusable bags. Such risk can be reduced if consumers are willing to use separate bags for raw and cooked/ready-to-eat foods as well as dispose reusable bags if contaminated with raw meat, e.g. through spillage of raw meat juices, etc. Protection of public health is the priority, and every effort should be made to ensure food safety.
default&#xa0;default3. Statement by Hugh Pennington defaultEdefaultmeritus defaultProfessor of Bacteriology, defaultAberdeen Universitydefault default– Quoted in Huffington Post UK 30 October 2013defaultHugh Pennington
default 
defaultwarns that germs from raw meat can transfer easily to other foods. In the case of food that doesn't require cooking, such as fruit and vegetables, these germs can b
defaulte easily transferred to people.  
defaultSpeaking to 
defaultBBC Radio 5 
defaultlive's
default Drive
default Prof 
defaultPennington likens this use of 'bags for life' to preparing raw chicken on a chopping board, and then using it for vegetables or such like.
defaultWhen pressed for a solution he tells the station: 
default"Washing the bag is not a very good idea - you can't be certain you've got rid of all the bugs. For any bag that's has raw meat in it, I would recommend that bag is disposed of."
default4. STATEMENT IN SCOTTISH PARLIAMENT ON FOOD STANDARDS AGENCY POSITION ON THE TAKEWAY FOOD SECTOR WITH REGARD TO THE PROPOSAL TO INTRODUCE A CHARGE ON CARRIER BAGSdefaultQuestion S4W-18037: Jamie defaultMcGrigordefault, Highlands and Islands, Scottish Conservative and Unionist Party, Date Lodged: 31/10/2013defaultTo ask the Scottish Government what the Food Standards Agency Scotland's position is on the potential impact on the takeaway food sector of the proposal to introduce a charge on carrier bags.
default&#xa0;
defaultAnswered by Michael Matheson (14/11/2013):defaultThe Food Standards Agency’s remit in this respect is concerned with providing advice on the potential risk to food safety.
defaultThe Food Standards Agency’s position regarding the potential for the transfer of pathogens between raw foods (such as raw meat and vegetables containing soil) and ready to eat foods is clear. Carrier bags which have previously been used to transport unpackaged or unsealed raw foods could present a cross-contamination risk to unpackaged ready to eat foods.
defaultFoods purchased from takeaways tend to be cooked, ready to eat foods which are usually wrapped or partially wrapped before placing in a carrier bag. These food items should not in themselves present a risk of contamination if they are cooked and handled properly by the caterer in accordance with food hygiene legislation.
defaultWith more and more consumers reusing carrier bags, either for sustainability or as a result of charging the Food Standards Agency’s advice to help prevent bacteria spreading to ready-to-eat food is as follows:
default1. Keep raw meat and fish separate from ready-to eat-foods, in separate bags.
default2. If your bags are re-useable, keep one or two just for use with raw meat and fish.
default3. Do not use them for ready-to-eat foods.
default4. Re-useable bags (and single use carrier bags) should be disposed of if there has been any spillage of raw meat juices.
default&#xa0;
defaultCurrent Status:default Answered by Michael Matheson on 14/11/2013
default&#xa0;default5. ADVICE OF FOOD STANDARDS AGENCY IN WALESdefaultWhile a carrier bag may look clean there is always the potential for cross-contamination of ready-to-eat foods.
default 
default4 J
defaultuly
default 2012
default&#xa0;defaultPROPOSAL TO EXEMPT BIODEGRABLE AND OXODEGRADABLE PLASTIC BAGSdefault&#xa0;defaultOur members have concerns over this proposal which we have been informed is partly to encourage a UK bio and oxo degradable bag manufacturing industry.  With regard to the latter the majority of plastic bag manufacturing takes place outside of the UK.  Our members are of the opinion that the manufacture of such a bag is most likely to take place in the Far East and will not lead to the creation of jobs in the UK.  
defaultThe feedback we have had from customers both in foodservice and the grocery sector is that such a bag will be far more expensive than current thin gauge bags and may need to be subsidised by the retail sector.
defaultWe are also concerned that even small quantities of degradable plastics are likely to cause significant detrimental impacts to the quality of plastics recyclates.  This means degradable plastic bags will require separate collection and we trust these additional costs will be included in the current review.
defaultWe are fully committed to the development of the UK recycling industry and feel any development which jeopardises recyclate quality for which our members pay high prices must be handled with extreme caution.
default&#xa0;defaultFINDINGS OF THE STUDYdefault COMMISSIONED BY EUROPEAN PLASTICS CONVERTERS (EUPC)default.
defaultEuPC said it had commissioned independent industrial tests which had been conducted by Dr Wolfgang Stadlbauer of the Transfer Centre for Polymer Technology in Austria.
defaultTests focused on four different mixtures of degradable plastic bags and one virgin LDPE recycling material and were conducted during a six month period, during which more than 9.45 tonnes of plastic carrier bags were processed and more than 3,700 measurements were taken, EuPc said.
default“Although all the materials could be processed, the results show that even in quantities as low as 2%, degradable plastic films cause significant, detrimental impacts to the quality of plastic recyclates.
default“These impacts are not only detrimental in terms of mechanical properties of the recycled material, but also involve visual impacts on the newly produced film,” EuPc said in a statement.
defaultThe Brussels organisation has subsequently called on legislators and waste management authorities across the European Union to push for increased separation and collection of degradable plastics.
defaultAlexander Dangis, EuPc’s managing director, said: “Over the past 
defaultyears, there has been considerable concern in Europe surrounding the effects of bio-degradable plastics on recycling streams.
default“These test results now prove that separate collection of degradable 
defaultplastic products is needed in Europe if we want to further develop recycling streams and work towards a circular economy”.
default14 November 2013
default&#xa0;
default