&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultQaser Lab, University College London
default (LTD0004)
default&#xa0;
defaultHow can local authorities attract defaultgreater investment from the private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure? What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?default&#xa0;
defaultThe recent economic crisis has determined a cut by central governments of funds 
defaultavailable for transport types of investments. In 2009
default,
default local authorities suffered a striking reduction in government grants 
defaultapproximately 
defaultequal to 55%, in conjunction with a 61% reported decrease in revenue from the fiscal system. But what is particularly interesting in relation to these data is 
defaultthe claim by 37% of UK
default local authorities of the difficulty in securing loans, and above all
default,
default they
default express alarm at not being able to raise long-term borrowing at cost-effective rates (United Cities and Local Government, 2009).
default&#xa0;
defaultMunicipal bonds are a possible financial source for local authorities
default’
default transport investment
default,
default which 
defaulthowever 
defaultrequire 
defaultfinancial 
defaultdecentralization
default from central government
default. There is increasing interest in different European countries such as France, the UK and Germany, to mention a few, to develop municipal bonds to provide loans at competitive rates to local authorities for infrastru
defaultcture investment. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the UK on average local authorities in England and Wales borrow £ 5 bn each year for infrastructure investment (LGA, 2012) and most of the long-term borrowing by the Councils comes from the Public Works Loan Board. However, in 2010, 
defaultthe UK Treasury decided to increase the Public Works Loan Board rate from 0.2% to 1% above the government benchmark ‘gilt’ rate, followed by other changes in the budget reviews. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis continuous tweaking of the rates, and the government’s ambivalent attit
defaultude towards localism and decentralised fiscal regimes, has infused uncertainty in the UK infrastructure investment market. 
defaultT
defaulthese changes have prompted the Local Government Association (LGA) and the Welsh LGA to examine and build the case for a
defaultn alternative
default model based on the Nordic very successful municipal bond experience, this is a
default new collective agency
default that can coordinate the local authorities and give technical support
default dedicated to the issuance of bonds for local authorities
default particularly in infrastructu
defaultre investment
default 
default(McCauley, 2012
default; Medda, 2013
default). 
default&#xa0;
defaultAnother possible of private intervention is through pension funds and infrastructure funds. 
defaultWhen we consider UK pension fund resources we can observe that the level of resour
defaultces available for tr
defaulta
defaultnsport
default investment is too low compared to international levels (Peston, 2012). One of the most active UK pension funds in infrastructure investment, the London Pensions Fund Auth
defaultority (LPFA)
default in July 2010 had assets worth only £4.0 billion, with infrastructure inv
defaultestments comprising only 5% (
defaultCroce et al., 2011
default). 
defaultThese figures prove that the UK pension fund mechanisms are still too fragmented to pool sufficient financial resources for the required investments (Croce et al., 2011).  Nevertheless, interesting initiati
defaultves such as the Pension Infrastructure Platform (PIP) have been launched to address the shortfall of resources and to attract substantial capital for infrastructure investments. More such initiatives should be created by local authorities in order to addre
defaultss the fragmented UK pension fund industry. 
defaultNot too dissimilar is the discussion that we can raise on infrastructure funds.
default&#xa0;
defaultTherefore, in order for local authorities to attract greater investment from the private sector authorities must align their object
defaultives more closely with those of private investors, and also examine the use of alternative funding possibilities. 
defaultThe fact that 
defaultpension funds and infrastructure funds 
defaultfail to adjust to the needs of private investors represents a type of market failure 
defaultwhi
defaultch 
defaultrequir
defaultes
default government
default/local authorit
defaulty
default intervention. Ottesen (2011) succinctly remarks that “the government must establish guiding principles and let the market mechanisms work within these established guidelines.” 
defaultA reasonable proposal would be for fund m
defaultanagers, investors and local authorities to find common ground through interaction and cooperation and seek to restructure the current investment vehicles.     
default&#xa0;
defaultFor instance, local authorities can promote the use of hybrid financial structures as effectiv
defaulte tools for stimulating green investment.  Hybrid structures are known as ‘split-finance’ model
defaults,
default as the funding is split between two invest
defaultors: a bank and a pension fund
default where the bank can fund a construction project such as a greenfield project and then 
defaultexit after construction is complete. This arrangement would meet the Basel III requirement for shorter investments, and would ensure higher liquidity. A pension fund can then invest in the project during its operation period and thus avoid construction ris
defaultks.
default&#xa0;
defaultApart from attracting private investment participation, local authorities should seek out alternative funding schemes. It is worth mentioning that the United Kingdom does not have Sovereign Wealth Funds (SWF). Sovereign Wealth Funds are public 
defaultinvestment funds that are usually funded by foreign-exchange reserves. Introducing a UK Sovereign Wealth Fund could be an alternative form of funding.  It i
defaults worth mentioning here 
defaultthat other than being a new form of funding scheme, SWFs can also be used to
default attract private investment. As observed by Armitstead (2012), the establishment of a British Sovereign Wealth Fund would
default anchor the advocacy of the UK Government in infrastructure investment, thereby instilling greater confidence in its returns. 
defaultResearch 
defaultconducted by PWC (2011) shows that the establishment of a Sovereign Wealth Fund improves transparency in a country, thereby mitigating the extensive political risk that exist in infrastructure investments and improving entry conditions for private investor
defaults. Comparative data moreover indicates that countries with Sovereign Funds have a higher proportion of inf
defaultrastructure investment to GDP. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1
default&#xa0;
default