&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the 
defaultSevenoaks Cycle Forum (CYS0088)
default&#xa0;
defaultDebate continues to be based on the
default widely shared but erroneous 
defaultassumption that road safety is accurately defined by crash and casualty statistics.  
defaultDuring its 2012 inquiry
default your
default committee notably failed to ask the basic question ‘What is road safety and how 
defaultshould it be measured
default?’ The current inquiry should make amends
default by revisiting this question
default and should make clear that road safety includes 
defaultmuch 
defaultmore than just casualty reduction
default.   The 
defaultexclusive 
defaultreliance on 
defaultStats19 data
default 
defaultto measure safety for cyclists and pedestrians 
defaultis flawed for at least three reasons: a) it leads t
defaulto an assumption that an absence of crashes and casualties 
defaulton 
defaulta particular road means that 
defaultroad 
defaultis ‘safe’
default,
default when in fact 
defaultit is 
defaultoften 
defaultso unsafe that pedestrians and cyclists are forced to avoid it. 
defaultb
default) crashes involving cyclists are often un
defaultder-
defaultreported 
defaultc
default) ann
defaultual reductions in 
defaultoverall 
defaultKSI figures owe
default more to improved
default NHS casualty treatment and
default better
default vehicle design to protect motorists
default than to real improvements in road safety 
default for vulnerable users
default.
default  Road safety is a complex area of social policy, like public he
defaultalth
default, child protection
default or community safety, but 
defaultthe conventional wisdom among road safety professionals does not reflect this.  Nobody would measure public health
default outcomes
default by looking solely at statistics for acute episodes such as heart attacks and strokes
default.  Nobody would measure crime by looking solely at murders and serious assaults. 
defaultNobody would measure child welfare by counting only children who are taken to hospital.
default But road safety is 
defaultstill 
defaultmeasured solely by looking at KSI statistics.  The DfT should 
defaultcopy the Home Office which supplements police statistics of recorded crime by publishing the British Crime Survey.  A British Road Safety Survey using opinion sampling would be an overdue innovation and your committee should recommend it.  
defaultIt is not enough
default just to tell people that cycling is statistically safe; for inexperienced cyclists and potential cyclists, an individual risk assessment based on their own perceptions
default 
defaultis what counts.
default 
defaultThis is 
defaultparticularly important 
defaultwhen parents are deciding whether or not
default to let their children ride bikes on the road.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultI think these recommendations would help give your report a broader national perspective on the issue of cycle safety outside major cities.  
defaultThat is not to say that the issues emerging from the London debate (HGV safety, segregation, cycle training and redesign of junctions)
default are not also relevant in rural and suburban areas.  We would just like a tiny fraction of the attention (and the generous
default funding) which is being directed towards cycle safety in London to be channelled in our direction as well.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default