&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Department of Energy and Climate Change (IPC0025)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultHow robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report?defaultThe Government considers that the conclusions of the AR5 Physi
defaultcal Science Basis report are robust.  The report was produced by over 850 independent expert scientists, all leaders in their fields (209 Lead Authors, 50 Review Editors and Over 600 Contributing Authors).  The report took over 2 years to produce and under
defaultwent multiple rounds of expert review.  It was also reviewed by the 194 governments which form the IPCC.  They have all accepted the findings.   
defaultIPCC reports 
defaultaim to assess the available literature and draw conclusions based on the full range of evidence. 
default Some individual conclusions will be more robust than others depending on the state of scientific knowledge in a particular area.
default  
defaultThe Physical Science Basis report cite
defaults
default more than 9,200 scientific publications
default and employs defined language to describe the 
defaultavailability of evidence (e.g. limited, medium or robust) and the degree of agreement of the evidence (e.g. low, medium, high).  Similarly defined language is used to describe both the level of confidence in a finding and the likelihood of an outcome or re
defaultsult occurring.  The use of this defined uncertainty language allowed the Physical Science Basis report to communicate clearly and directly the range of certainty in the scientific evidence and confidence in the conclusions drawn. 
defaultA
defaultt the opening of the Se
defaultptember 
defaultPhysical Science Basis Report 
defaultacceptance meeting 
defaultin Stockholm, the 
defaultIPCC Working Group 1 
defaultco-chair 
defaultProfessor 
defaultThomas Stocker 
defaultreferred
default to the unprecedented level of scrutiny and attention to detail 
defaultthat makes 
defaultthe AR5 Physical Science Basis report one o
defaultf the most robust 
defaultreports 
defaultever written.  
default“I know of no other document that has undergone this scrutiny and that has involved so many critical people who offered their insight and advice. This is what makes this report so unique. It stands out as a reliabl
defaulte and indispensable source of knowledge about climate change
default.
default”
defaultFinally it should be noted that there is strong continuity with the conclusions of previous IPCC reports, although the authorship has undergone 
defaultconsiderable
default change since these reports were prep
defaultared.
defaultHave the IPCC adequately addressed criticisms of previous reports? defaultThere were only a few inaccuracies in the 4
defaultth
default Assessment Report, and none were found in the previous WGI report.  These had little bearing on the main messages of the 4
defaultth
default Assessment 
defaultReport. Nevertheless
default an independent evaluation of IPCC procedures and processes was 
defaultundertaken 
defaultby the Inter
default-
defaultAcademy Council.  As a result, the IPCC’s processes and management were extensively updated 
defaultand s
defaulttrengthened.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe IPCC 
defaulthas also 
defaultpublished 
defaulta 
defaultprotocol
default for investigating and if necessary, correctin
defaultg alleged errors in its reports.  We are confident that criticisms following the last report have been adequately addressed.
defaultHow much scope is there to question the report’s conclusions?defaultThere are two issues 
defaultthat might be considered here: a) has the IPCC missed key evidence in its assessment of the science of climate change? and b) will its conclusions be over-turned by subsequent research?
defaultWith regard to (a), as noted previously, the procedures are very robus
defaultt.  
defaultEach and every finding has already been subject to consideration during the report peer-review process.  This enables proper scientific debate and challenge.  Over 1,000 expert reviewers, from 55 countries and 38 governments, examined and commented on 
defaultthe draft report.  Whilst every effort is made to ensure that the literature is fully assessed it is not inconceivable that some issues might be missed. However it seems very unlikely that the main conclusions of the Report would be in error, given the rig
defaultour of the processes and the extensive evidence base underpinning them. Furthermore the IPCC is committed to transparency and will be making the draft documents and experts’ comments available publically during 2014, allowing those interested to understand
default the debates behind some of the conclusions.  
defaultWith regard to (b) the science of climate change will continue to develop. Science proceeds by challenge and questioning and so new insights, new data and new analysis will undoubtedly arise and may lead to some conclusions being refined. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe Government understands that the IPCC Working Group I Report assessed all relevant peer-reviewed climate research and modelling undertaken since 2007.  
defaultAs already noted the report was produce
defaultd by over 850 independent expert scientists from all over the world, many being leaders in their fields (209 Lead Authors, 50 Review Editors and Over 600 Contributing Authors)
default.  
defaultThen the author teams considered the comments of 1000 reviewers. The report re
defaultflects any lack of consensus through the use of confidence levels throughout.  
defaultThus, the Government is confident that the assessment takes into account the full range of the wealth of recent research and the conclusions of its authors
default, plus the full range 
defaultof views of climate scientists, because of the thorough and open review process
default. 
defaultAppendix A to the Principles Governing IPCC Work
default explicitly states that “
defaulti
defaultn selecting scoping meeting participants, consideration should be given to the following criteria: s
defaultcientific, technical and socio-economic expertise, including the range of views; geographical representation; a mixture of experts with and without previous experience in IPCC; gender balance; experts with a background from relevant stakeholder and user gr
defaultoups, including governments.
default”
default&#xa0;
defaultIt would be presumptuous to claim that any scie
defaultnce is settled. Scientific conclusions depend on evidence and theories may develop as evidence grows as we noted above.  However much of climate science may reasonably be considered, in an every-day sense,  to be settled, where there is a strong observatio
defaultnal evidence base or well developed basic physical theory. F
defaultor example
default there are very good observations of 
defaultrising concentrations of greenhouse gases, a warming world, and related effects such as ice loss and sea level rise. The science underpinning the war
defaultming effect of greenhouse gases is well understood. 
defaultHowever, the complexities of clouds and various feedback mechanisms add uncertainties. And the science is not yet able to resolve many important questions, such as “which local areas will experience more
default rainfall, and which will experience more droughts?”, or “how will the Indian monsoon be affected by climate change?” Even so, detailed analysis points strongly to the links between increasing greenhouse gas concentrations and warming of the Planet. 
defaultPredi
defaultcting the future course of climate change is more uncertain – we cannot easily predict the future course of emissions and there is a degree of uncertainty about both the scale of the warming response to increased greenhouse gases, and about the detailed sp
defaultatial and seasonal consequences at a local level. But it is clear that continuing on the current track of growing emissions will lead to 
defaultfuture increase
defaults
default in temperature, 
defaultcontinued melting of ice, and rising sea levels. The scale of change may have some unc
defaultertainty but we know enough to recognise that the risks may be considerable and cannot be ignored. Research meanwhile will help reduce this uncertainty by improving our quantification of the many complex interactions within the climate system. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Government considers that the Summary for Policymakers adequately conveys what is
default meant by scientific uncertainties.  It expresses these uncertainties through likelihood and confidence terminology agreed by the IPCC Reports authors that represents the consensus expert judgements of the authors.  The IPCC’s first (Working Group I) AR5 r
defaulteport is on the physical science basis of climate change and thus concerns science and scientific uncertainties, changes to the climate system and associated climate hazards.  We note that the second AR5 report to be published next March concerns impacts, 
defaultadaptation and vulnerability 
defaultwill provide a more comprehensive basis for assessing the risks of climate change 
defaultto 
defaultthe 
defaultenvironment and human societ
defaulty
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultSections of the Summary for Policy Makers, Techn
defaultical Summary and several chapters of the Working Group I report consider climate models and their reliability, by validation against observations and model inter
default-
defaultcomparison.
default  In particular, Chapter 9 is specifically dedicated to climate models’ performance
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultUnderstanding and explaining the reasons for the recent slowdown in the 
defaultrise in 
defaultglobal average near-surface temperature is an area of 
defaultactive scientific enquiry by many experts
default.  T
defaulthe 
defaultIPCC AR5 Report provides a useful assessment of the available evidence up until the submission deadline in March 2013
default.
default It highlighted the volatility of trend estimates on such a short time frame and identifie
defaultd possible reasons for such a short 
defaultterm slow-down in warming compared to the longer term trend, including the El Nino/La Nina natural variation in the Pacific region. An important conclusion from the IPCC was that  global 
defaultsurface
default temperature is only one m
defaulteasure of climate change, and the heat capacity of the parts of the system that make up the “surface” is dwarfed by the heat capacity of the oceans.  To understand whether the 
defaultglobe
default is warming, the heat content of oceans and ice must also be considered
default.  W
defaulte note that work that has been subsequently published  provides further insight into these reasons. For example, Kosaka and Xie (2013) provided further evidence of 
defaultthe role the Pacific Ocean plays in regulating global temperatures, while Cowtan and Way (20
default13) show that poor 
defaultobservational coverage of the rapidly warming Arctic may have resulted in an underestimate of recent warming trends
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaultis Report does not deal directly with economic issues. These will be covered fully in the WG2 and WG3 Reports due in March and April 2014. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe 
defaultconclusions 
defaultconfirm the need for urgent global action to address climate change
default. The climate is clearly changing now due to human activities.  The report notes that if little is done to curb
default current emission trends, global temperatures will exceed the internationally agreed limit of 2
defaulto
defaultC in a few decades and could reach 5
defaulto
defaultC above 19th century levels
default by 210
default0. It also shows that significant and sustained emission reductions will be required to k
defaulteep temperatures below 2
defaulto
defaultC, and delay will require more rapid reductions later. 
defaultIn particular the Report concludes that t
defaulto have a good chance 
default(&gt;66%) 
defaultof limiting global temperature rise to 2°C or less, cumulative CO
default2
default emissions 
defaultneed
default to be limited to 
default8
default00 gig
defaultatonnes of carbon above the pre-industrial period
default, taking into account the effect of the non-CO2 greenhouse gases 
default. 
defaultHowever w
defaulte have already emitted
default about 530 
defaultgigatonnes of carbon since the industrial revolution and emissions are growing.
default At current rates w
defaulte could reach an accumulated emission of 800 
defaultgigatonnes of carbon
default in a few decades.  To avoid exceeding any target on global temperature, global net emissions rates must be reduced to zero.   Therefore current targets on global temperature rise will likely
default require the development and even
defaulttual deployment of technologies
default which remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. 
defaultThis strengthen
defaults the 
defaultcase for 
defaultcountries to agree to undertake urgent 
defaultact
defaultion 
defaultto reduce their domestic carbon emissions and 
defaultto 
defaultsecure an ambiti
defaultous legally binding global agreement in 2015. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFormally the role of the IPCC is to “
defaultassess on a compre
defaulthensive, objective, open and transparent basis the scientific, technical and socio-economic information relevant to understanding the scientific basis of risk of 
defaulthuman-induced climate change, its potential impacts and options for adaptation and mitigation.
default IPCC reports should be neutral with respect to policy, although they may need to deal objectively with scientific, technical and socio-economic factors relevant to the application of particular policies
default.” 
defaultThe IPCC is a highly effective 
defaultmechanism for asse
defaultssing scientific knowledge
default. It is 
defaultindependent, transparent and 
defaultattracts top scientists who give of their own time to participate. It has well laid out procedures and is open to both expert and Government Review. We see no evidence that it has deliberately sought to justify political commitment or indeed to propose a p
defaultolicy response. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe AR5 Physical Science Basis 
defaultSummary for Policy Makers (
defaultSPM
default)
default was approved by the Session of Working Group 1; IPCC proce
defaultdures require that such Sessions are open to all governments.  The “Principles Governing IPCC Work” state that “
defaultIPCC reports should be neutral with respect to policy
default” and the Session was conducted with this principle in mind. Indeed, from the Chair, Co-Cha
defaultir Prof Thomas Stocker stated that scientific integrity should be paramount in the Session’s deliberations.  
defaultThe approval process might best be described as a dialogue between the Government representatives and the Lead Authors to ensure conclusions were 
defaultwell founded, balanced, relevant and communicated clearly. The last word on the content was always provided by the Lead Authors present. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe UK has committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions by 80% on 1990 levels by 2050. This level was set following the advice of the independent Committee on Climate Change (CCC). This represents the CCC’s view of 
defaultan appropriate UK share of a global emissions reduction pathway that limits c
defaultentral estimates of global temperature increase by 2100 to 2°C over pre-industrial levels, and 
defaultkeeps 
defaultthe likelihood of a 4°C increase very low
default 
default(e.g. less than 1%).
defaultThe Committee o
defaultn Climate Change, having considered the evidence in the Fifth Assessment Report, recently concluded that t
defaulthe climate objective
default 
defaultand the global emissions reduction required to achieve it remain an appropriate basis for 
defaultthe UK’s 
defaultpolicy, both because of the ve
defaultry significant risks associated with dangerous climate change and the costs of delayed-action pathways.
default&#xa0;defaultGovernment has committed to 
defaultreview progress towards
default the EU emissions goal in early 2014. If at that point our domestic commitments place us on a different emissions trajectory than the Emissions Trading System trajectory agreed by the EU, we will, as appropriate, revise our budget to align it with the actu
defaultal EU trajectory.
defaultIn accordance with the requirements of the Climate Change Act 2008, the review will take into account advice from the Committee on Climate Change, who have considered the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report in their report published on 7 
defaultNovember 2013.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default