&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists (HCP0005)default&#xa0;
default1 Overviewdefault&#xa0;
defaultThis is a submission by the Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists, the voluntary registration body of Audiologists (including Hearing 
defaultTherapists), Cardiac Physiologists, Gastro-intestinal Physiologists, Neurophysiologists, Respiratory Physiologists and Sleep Physiologists ahead of the Health Select Committee’s accountability hearing with the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) to 
defaulthighlight concerns around the Government’s approach to HCPC.
default&#xa0;
default2 The defaultGovernment’sdefault relationship with HCPCdefault&#xa0;
default2.1 RCCP has work
defaulted
default closely with HCPC in the past, when HCPC recommended the statutory regulation of clinical physiologists, and has had a good relatio
defaultnship with HCPC. We believe HCPC does a difficult job well and provides a clear oversight of the professions it regulates. Its transparency reports on the complaints provide the public with the reassurance that HCPC 
defaultdispenses its tasks thoroughly.
default&#xa0;
default2.2 RCC
defaultP is concerned that while HCPC is a respected body among healthcare professionals, it risks being undermined by the Government
default not following its advice in certain areas. For example, over the years, HCPC has recommended that statutory regulation should be 
defaultextended to include further groups, such as psychotherapists, clinical perfusionists, medical illustrators and clinical physiologists. Initially, the Government appeared to adopt HCPC’s advice, primarily in the 
default2007 White Paper ‘Trust, Assurance and Safety
default – the Regulation of Health Professionals in the 21st Century
default’. However, since then the Government has moved away from introducing statutory regulation towards 
defaulta 
defaultmodel of accredited 
defaultvoluntary registration and has ignored HCPC’s clear evidence for the need 
defaultfor statutory regulation for patient safety. This undermines the standing of HCPC as the regulator for Allied Health Professionals.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 The large number of unregulated or voluntary regulated healthcare professions in the NHS
default also
default risks undermin
defaulting public 
defaultconfidence in 
defaultthe regulators. Patients generally assume that the professionals they s
defaultee
default in a hospital setting 
defaultas an integral part of the patient care pathway 
defaultare regulated like doctors and nurses are. Awareness of the third 
defaultmain 
defaultregulator
default, HCPC,
default is more li
defaultmited among the general public and the awareness of voluntary regulators is 
defaultlimited 
defaulteven further. This is evidenced by the fact that since its creation in 2001, RCCP has never received a complaint from a member of the public and the number of complaints ag
defaultainst clinical physiologists received by RCCP 
default(
defaultten that have reached the investigatory stage 
defaultsince 2001) 
defaultis significantly lower than might be expected on the basis of the complaints HCPC gets on average. For example, 
defaultthe Health &amp; Care Professions Council r
defaulteceived 21 fitness to practice concerns per 5,000 registrants in 2011-12, nearly a quarter of which were raised by members of the public. 30% of all concerns were assessed as concerns where there was a “case to answer”.
default While the standard among healthcare 
defaultprofessionals such as clinical physiologists is generally very high, the statistics suggest that concerns around unregulated practitioners are going unaddressed at the moment.
default&#xa0;
default2.4 The Government has proposed Accredited Voluntary Registration (AVR) as an a
defaultlternative for statutory regulation. From RCCP’s experience, it is not 
defaultan 
defaultalternative that is fit for patient safeguarding. 
defaultAs a voluntary register, the powers of the RCCP are severely curbed – from being unable to compel employers who contact RCCP with co
defaultncerns about a registrant to give evidence to 
defaultthe point where the register’s administrators have themselves faced civil legal action for ‘defaming’ incompetent practitioners that they have attempted to bring sanctions against.
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.5 
defaultIn practice this means 
defaultthat while RCCP operates a disciplinary code and procedure, it cannot protect patients from continuing to be treated by practitioners who have not been registered and who are potentially unfit to practice, as it currently has no powers of enforcement. Sinc
defaulte 2001 the RCCP have received ten complaints that have moved to the investigatory hearing stage. In all ten cases the respondents have failed to respond and subsequently have failed to renew their membership thus removing themselves from the process. These
default practitioners then have the opportunity to start again in a ne
defaultw NHS trust or private facility, helped by a lack of awareness among NHS organisations of the voluntarily registers and the legal grey area of making membership of a voluntary registry a mandat
defaultory requirement for employment.
default&#xa0;
default2.5 The accreditation element of AVR will not address these problems. Accreditation is given by the Professional Standards Authority, based on a voluntary register’s governance arrangements. They will not assess the effecti
defaultveness of the voluntary register in safeguarding patients, i.e. whether a voluntary register can successfully discipline and if necessary prevent a practitioner from working. This means AVR remains inadequate to address the concerns of patients.
default&#xa0;
default2.6 
defaultMinisters have previously stated that those professions for which a patient safety case can be made will be considered for statutory regulation, subject to a cost-benefit risk analysis.  However, it is unclear if such a risk analysis has already been under
defaulttaken, how one is triggered, who would undertake such an analysis and what the minimum scope of such an analysis should be.
default Given that HCPC has already recommended statutory regulation based on such a risk analysis, it is unclear whether the Government is 
defaultwilling to listen to the bodies it has designated to help ensure patient safety in the NHS.
default&#xa0;
default2.7 RCCP would suggest the Committee explore with representatives from HCPC the extent to which the Government acts on HCPC’s advice in regulatory matters and 
defaultHCPC’s view of AVR.
default&#xa0;
default3 About the Registration Council for Clinical Physiologistsdefault&#xa0;
default3.1 
defaultThe Registration Council for Clinical Physiologists was founded in 2001 to operate a voluntary register
default for clinical physiologists
default, with the understanding that voluntary 
defaultregistration would be for a time-limited period until statutory regulation was in place as recommended by the Health Professions Council in 2004. RCCP’s officers voluntarily maintain the register in addition to their professional duties.
default&#xa0;
default3.2 Clinical phys
defaultiologists work directly with patients, performing sensitive procedures such as assessments and adjustments of pacemakers, lung function tests, and both assessing and diagnosing and treating hearing loss. These can be invasive procedures, including internal
default ultrasound and endoscopies. Doctors and surgeons then act on the basis of the diagnosis by clinical physiologist, which can include surgeries such as neurosurgery in the treatment of epilepsy. All of these procedures pose serious risks to patients if not 
defaultcarried out with the highest professional standards.
default&#xa0;
default3.3 
defaultDespite the sensitive and risky nature of the procedures they undertake, clinical physiologists are not subject to statutory regulation in the same way as doctors or nurses – or even professionals s
defaultuch as a
defaultrt therapists. 
defaultIndeed, even though professionals responsible for dispensing hearing aids on the high street are statutorily regulated, clinical physiologists working in NHS audiology services, prescribing and fitting devices to both 
defaultpatients of all
default ages
default, are not. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4 Many of the procedures performed by clinical physiologists in the UK are performed by statutorily regulated professionals in much of Western Europe, such as doctors, and by clinicians in the United States. As a result of a specificall
defaulty trained workforce, treatment and diagnosis can be provided more cost effectively by clinical physiologists in the UK, while at the same time freeing up doctors to deal with other patients. This is already happening in some areas but further developments 
defaultcould only take place if concerns around patient safety can be addressed through a robust system of regulation.
default&#xa0;
default3.5 Clinical physiology is an increasingly specialised and advanced profession with a large number of dedicated professionals working primarily
default in an NHS hospital setting. In the UK, there are more than 5,000 clinical physiologists, they form part of the wider Healthcare Science workforce that includes 
defaultother statutory professions such as Biomedical Scientists. 
defaultTogether, they carry out around 80% 
defaultof diagnostic procedures in healthcare.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 
default2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default