&#xa0;
defaultThis memorandum is submitted by 
defaultthe British Vehicle
default Rental and Leasing Association 
defaulton behalf of its members 
defaultand their customers
default. T
defaulthe BVRLA represents the interests of more than two million business car drivers and the millions of people who use a rental vehicle each year. 
defaultThe cost of 
defaultmotor insurance for the vehicle rental industry has rapidly escalated to a crisis, as the costs associated with motor accident claims and related motor insurance costs reach unsustainable levels. The increasing cost of compulsory motor insurance currently 
defaultcreates the greatest risk for the profitability and sustainability of our industry and the vehicle rental industry is calling on the Government to take urgent, decisive action that will bring relief in the short and long term.
default 
defaultFigures which we have collat
defaulted show that over the last six years the number of personal injury claims which our members receive has increased from 17% of accidents to 25% of accidents. In addition, the average cost of each claim has more than doubled over the last four years.
defaultWe woul
defaultd recommend that the Government should take the follow
defaulting
default steps which we believe will help further
default r
defaulteduce the costs associated with whiplash claims
default:
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe BVRLA is the trade body for companies engaged in the leasing and rental of cars and commercial vehicles. Its 
defaultm
defaultem
defaultbers provide rental, leasing and fleet management services to corporate users and consumers. They operate a combined fleet of 2.
default75
default million cars, vans and trucks, buying 
defaultnearly half 
defaultof all new vehicles sold in the UK. 
defaultAs well as 
defaultcampaigning on 
defaultkey issues 
defaultaffecting the sector, the BVRLA regulates the industry through a mandatory code of conduct.
default 
defaultwww.bvrla.co.uk
default  
defaultRecovery of DamagesdefaultWe would suggest the Transport Committee considers recommending further reforms to help reduce the costs associated with whiplash claims. This could, for example, be achieved by ensuring that a claimant is not able to recover damages greater than 2.5% of t
defaulthe Judicial Studies Guidelines for the most serious personal injury, unless a permanent and serious impairment has been sustained and can be proven. This approach would provide certainty and clarity for all parties involved. If there is a dispute then the 
defaultsmall claims court provides a solution to bring claims to a resolution at a proportionate cost. 
defaultThe committee may be aware that a similar approach has been taken in other common law jurisdictions which have been affected by rising insurance costs. We beli
defaulteve that lessons can be learnt from experiences in other jurisdictions which share the similar origins of our legal systems. Australia, Canada, and Ireland have, for example, all responded decisively to manage the spiralling cost of motor insurance given t
defaulthe detrimental effect to the wider economy. Each country mentioned recognised that unfettered access to the courts, regardless of severity of damage or costs of delivering compensation, was unsustainable and appropriate measures were implemented. 
defaultA key st
defaultrategy for maintaining affordable motor insurance adopted in the Canadian and Australian jurisdictions was to limit recovery for non-serious personal injuries. A number of methods, including caps, deductibles, and financial thresholds have been introduced 
defaultas a means of identifying non-serious injury. 
defaultFor example, in Alberta, Canada a cap on pay
default 
defaultouts was set at $4000 (around £2
default,
default500), while in Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and Prince Edward Island it was set at $2
default,
default500 (around £1
default,
default600). In the years between 2003 
defaultand 2011, average premiums fell in all of these provinces. The cap was a success in terms of reducing the severity of injury claims experience, reducing the frequency of minor injury claims, and stabilising premiums. Another reform implemented in Ontario w
defaultas a requirement that an injury had to be a “permanent and serious impairment of an important function” to seek recovery through the civil justice system.
defaultThe common experience has been that objective tests create 
defaultand deliver 
defaultgreater certainty. By introduc
defaulting the approach adopted by other jurisdictions, which largely looked at the process of identifying a genuine claim, had the desired outcome. This was introduced without the need to impose arbitrary factors which were difficult to prove, such as the speed 
defaultof impact as applied by the German judiciary.
default&#xa0;
defaultFraudulent claimsdefaultWe would recommend that the committee considers putting forward a recommendation for a change in the law where a court finds that a claim has been fraudulently exaggerated
default. In this event 
defaultth
defaulten we strongly recommend that the entire claim, which includes any genuine element, should be struck out.
defaultCurrently a claimant can submit an exaggerated claim with the peace of mind that if the fraud is discovered, the genuine element of the claim made wil
defaultl not be struck out. In contrast, the law on exaggerated first party insurance claims, the policyholder forfeits the whole insurance claim where the fraud is identified. 
defaultIn a recent court case of Summers -v- Fairclough Homes [2012] UKSC 26 the court held 
defaulta claim could be struck out under Civil Procedure Rules 3.4(2) or under a court’s inherent jurisdiction at any stage, but only in ‘very exceptional circumstances ’ at the end of a trial.  
defaultIn this particular case, the genuine value of the claim was found t
defaulto be £88,716. This had been exaggerated by approximately tenfold. The court, nevertheless, still concluded that the claim fell short of ‘very exceptional circumstances’ and allowed the claimant to still receive a payment of £88,716.
defaultThis court case heighte
defaultns our concern that there will be little or no disincentives for claimants to submit an exaggerated personal injury claim in the future. If our concern was to become more  widespread then we believe fraudulently exaggerated claims will directly impact acce
defaultss to justice for honest claimants, especially as the limited resource
default of the courts
default become
defaults
default clogged up in dealing with such claims.  We also believe that this will have a disproportionate impact on the costs associated with defending and challenging such 
defaultspurious claims. 
defaultThis approach has already been adopted successfully in the Republic of Ireland and would go some way to help reduce the cost of motor insurance in the UK.
defaultHead restraintsdefaultThere is research from Euro NCAP which shows whiplash injuries are 
defaultcommon in rear impacts. While the mechanisms by which the injuries are caused are not fully understood, it is known that seat and head restraint design can influence the risk of injury. Euro NCAP assesses the geometry of the restraint in relation to the he
defaultad and tests the seats in three severities of impact – high, medium and low – using a dummy specially designed for rear impacts. Further information is available 
defaulthere
default.
defaultGiven this research we would 
defaultsuggest that the committee should recommend that only head restraints with a Euro NCAP rating of 3 or above are fitted to newly manufactured vehicles. This could help reduce the occurrence of whiplash injuries especially in rear impacts.
default This could be mand
defaultated through the type approval process for newly registered vehicles.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe trust our comments will help to add value to the debate
default on how to reduce the number and costs of whiplash claims. 
defaultShould you require any additional information or c
defaultlarification then please do not hesitate to contact us.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default