&#xa0;
defaultWritten defaultevidence fromdefault Dr Arman Sarvarian, Lecturer in Law, University of Surrey (PCD 05)default1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultTh
defaultis is a 
defaultsubmission of written evidence in response to the call published by the House of Commons Political and Constitutional Reform Select Committee ('
defaultthe Committee') concerning its 
defaultinquiry
default on ‘Parliament’s role in conflict decisions: an update’
default. 
defaultThe main question of the inquiry is: ‘Given the commitment made by the Foreign Secretary in March 2011, how can progress be made on enshrining in law the necess
defaultity of consulting
default Parliament on military action?
default’ This
default submission 
defaultis 
defaultmade
default in my personal capacity as an academic lawyer specialising in public international law. 
default2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultI have submitted this evidence in order to assi
defaultst the Committee's forthcoming report
default by 
defaultillus
defaulttrating 
defaultthe 
defaultimportance 
defaultof
default clarifying the constitutional convention on consulting the House of Commons on military action for the purpose of 
defaultidentification of
default the legal position of the United Kingdom 
defaultconcerning
default the lawfulness of humanitarian interventio
defaultn in
default public in
defaultternational law. The central issue that it examines is whether the legal position has changed as a consequence of the 
defaultHouse of Commons vote on the Government motion
default of 29
default August 2013, in which the House declined to support the lawfulness of the 
defaultprinciple of humanitarian intervention. 
default3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn the process, this
default submission sets out the difficulties of identifying the legal position of the United Kingdom in light of the complex constitutional position concerning the initiation of military action. 
defaultIt
default has 
defaultbeen tailored to address the 
defaultterms of reference
default 
defaultfor
default this
default inquiry.
default In preparing 
defaultit
default, I have had the benefit of consulting the Committee's report of 6 September 2013, the written evidence of 17 October 2013 and 21 November 2013, and the oral evidence of 17 an
defaultd 24 October 2013
default which this submission is intended to supplement
default. 
defaultThe formation of cdefaultustomary international lawdefault4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultUnlike in national legal systems, public international law
default 
defaultlacks for most purposes a centralised authority for legislative purposes. In its 
defaultcentrifugal system, the primary legislators are States which make law by two principal means: 1) treaties; and 2) custom. Whereas 
defaulttreaties are concluded through relatively clear forms,
default custom is a less well-defined
default instrument.
default In 2012, the International L
defaultaw Commission
default decided to include the topic ‘Formation and evidence of customary international law’ in its programme of work. In light of the importance of the work of the Commission,
default this indicates both the importance of the topic and its underdeveloped 
defaultstate.
default5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe two well-known criteria for the formation of customary law are: 1) the practice of States; and 2) the legal 
defaultopinions or positions
default of States (
defaultopinio iuris sive necessitatis
default). 
defaultIn shorthand, the
default former criterion entails ‘what States have done’ wher
defaulteas the latter concerns ‘why (legally) States have done it’. The formation of a customary rule is necessarily a retrospective exercise: to determine whether a customary rule exists, international courts
default and scholars of international law
default examine the precede
defaultnts of State practice to distil whether the rule commands sufficient support amongst States. 
default6.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultP
defaultractice can be generated 
defaultby
default any organ of 
defaulta
default State
default, in particular by those
default with competence in the subject-matter of the rule concerned.
default For example, a resolution by the London Borough of Islington regarding the doctrine of humanitarian intervention would not manifest the practice of the UK in light of 
defaultthe 
defaultlack of competence 
defaultfor that body 
defaultin foreign affairs. 
defaultBy contrast
default, 
defaultthe note published
default by the Office of the Prime Minister
default on 29 August 2013 (entitled 'Chemical weapon use by the Syrian regime: UK government legal position')
default and incorporated into the statement by the Prime Minister in the House of Commons on 29 August 2013.
default 
defaultHowever 
defaultquesti
defaultonable
default in quality
default,
default 
defaultthe Note
default constitutes relevant practice
default for the purpose of defin
defaulting the UK legal position,
default as do
defaultes
default the House
default of Commons
default vote
default.
default 
default7.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe criterion of 
defaultopinio iuris 
defaultentails a subjective expression by a State of its legal position. This can either
default entail a view as to the State of the law today or an opinion as to what the law ought to be tomorrow. Leaving to one side the paradoxes well-known to international lawyers in this field, the prominence of the question of the legality of humanitarian inter
defaultvention in the Government motion, Opposition amendment and debate in the House, in my view, renders the votes of the House an expression of 
defaultopinio iuris 
defaultfor the purpose articulating the legal position of the United Kingdom. The problem created thereby is t
defaulthat the decision of the House rejecting the Government motion necessarily creates an inc
defaultonsistency between the established
default legal position
default of the United Kingdom
default on humanitarian intervention
default and the newly-expressed view of the House.    
default8.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultConsequently, a rel
defaultevant factor to this inquiry is not only the constitutional position concerning consultation of Parliament on military action but also the effect of such consultation on the articulation of the legal position of the country on international law. 
defaultIn light o
defaultf the increasing willingness by Governments over the course of the past decade to consult Parliament on military action and the novel position created by the Syrian vote in which the House of Commons refused (in a first in modern times) to support the Gove
defaultrnment on such action, there is a need for clarification of the respective legal values of the positions adopted by the Government and the House of Commons concerning the lawfulness of humanitarian intervention.
default This may apply to other forms of military action as well, such as self-defence.
default  
default  
default 
default  
defaultAssessing the legal value of the House of Commons votedefault9.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn light of the vagueness of the process of formation of customary international law and the immense diversity 
defaultof constitutional practices amongst States, assessment of the legal value of State practice is necessarily a highly relative and fact-sensitive exercise. In assessing the legal value of the defeat of the Government motion, a number of
default constitutional
default and p
defaultractical
default factors
default 
defaultmust be taken into account: 1) the royal prerogative on the use of force
default 
defaultand
default legally
default 
defaultnon-binding character of the motion; 
default2) the emerging constitutional convention that the House of Commons be consulted on military action save in an emerge
defaultncy;
default 3) the legislative supremacy of the House of Commons due to its collective electoral mandate; 
defaultand 
default4) the prominence of the issue 
defaultof legality in the consultation
default. At present, the variable practice of consultation renders an assessment of the legal val
defaultue of the vote overly complex.  
default10.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn the first place, the constitutional position suggests that the House of Commons vote
default does not have the effect of defining the legal position of the United Kingdom on humanitarian intervention.
default As the Royal P
defaultrerogative on
default uses of force remains intact, it was open to the Government to proceed with its own legal view concerning the lawfulness of humanitarian inter
defaultvention in its exercise of the P
defaultrerogative. 
defaultOn this approach, notwithstanding the political import of the vote of
default the House, it is valueless for the purpose of stating the legal position of the country.
default11.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHowever, the constitutional position appears to be qualified by an emerging convention that the House of Commons be consulted prior to taking military action. Moreove
defaultr, on this specific occasion, the significance of the vote is amplified by the decision of the Government to not exercise the prerogative in response:
default‘Let me say that the House has not voted for either motion tonight. I strongly believe in the need for a 
defaulttough response to the use of chemical weapons, but I also believe in respecting the will of this House of Commons. It is very clear tonight that, while the House has not passed a motion, the British Parliament, reflecting the views of the British people, d
defaultoes not want to see British military action. I get that, and the Government will act accordingly.’
defaultThis suggests that, in practice, the vote does carry normative weight in the exercise of the Royal Prerogative. This weight was linked to the electoral mandate of the House of Commons, which imbues its collective will with magnified importance. 
default12.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe legal 
defaultvalue of the vote is further strengthened by the prominence of the issue of legality in the debate on the motion. The Government motion, 
defaultinter alia
default: ‘Notes that the use of chemical weapons is a war crime under customary law and a crime against humanity, an
defaultd that the principle of humanitarian intervention provides a sound legal basis for taking action’.
default In his statement, the Prime Minister asserted: ‘We have a summary of the Government’s legal 
defaultposition, which makes it explicit that military action would hav
defaulte a clear legal basis.’
default A number of interventions and responses in the debate addressed the question of legality.
default It is clear that legality was not secondary or 
defaultperipheral
default to the vote but, to the contrary, was a core issue at the forefront o
defaultf the debate.
default Concordantly, this enhances the legal value of the decision of the House to reject the lawfulness of the principle of humanitarian intervention.
default13.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultTaking these factors into account, my view is that the House of Commons vote 
defaultshould have
default the effect of definin
defaultg the legal position of the United Kingdom for the purpose of customary international law. 
defaultAt present, it is too soon to reach a definitive conclusion concerning whether its position 
defaulthas
default in fact
default 
defaultchanged. 
defaultAlthough the constitutional position is that the 
defaultRoyal Prerogative may be exercised regardless of the view of the House of Commons, the particular circumstances of this vote vested it with such persuasive weight that the Government chose to respect the will of the House. Consequently, the legal position 
defaultof the United Kingdom on humanitarian intervention has changed: whereas the country has promoted the principle at least since Kosovo,
default it no longer supports its lawfulness. 
defaultClarifying the legal value of the House of Commons votedefault14.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe implication of this c
defaultonclusion is that the Government will cease to support the principle of humanitarian intervention in its conduct of foreign affairs in the United Nations and elsewhere. Although it is formally open to the Government to pursue its own legal position, its un
defaultdertaking to ‘respect the will of [the] House of Commons’ and the invidious inconsistency of ignoring the vote in its future position on humanitarian intervention render such a course inadvisable. At the least, the credibility of its legal position in rela
defaulttion to other States would be undermined by the fact that the House of Commons is on record as adopting a contrary position. 
default15.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe question of enshrining in law the necessity to consult Parliament prior to military action engages a variety of issues for the
default Committee to consider for its Report. However, in all cases a state of confusion concerning the legal position of the country is patently not a desirable 
defaultoutcome. Where the Government, as it did in the case of Syria, consult
defaults
default the House of Commons, receive
defaults a negative answer concerning the lawfulness of 
defaultmilitary action and
default respect
defaults
default the will of the House, it is essential for the conduct of foreign relations that the value of the consultation be clarified. 
default16.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFor this purpose, it is not necessary to enshrine in
default statute or resolution a duty to consult the House of Commons. A constitutional convention has the same effect of ensuring that the House expresses its view concerning, 
defaultinter alia
default, the legality of the Government’s proposed military action. The important
default qu
defaultestion is the following: where the House of Commons
default,
default as on 
default29 August
default 2013
default,
default rejects the lawfulness of the Govern
defaultment’s proposed military action
default and the Government 
defaultrespects
default 
defaultits
default will, is the Government bound by convention to align its legal position with that
default of the House?  
default17.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe aforementioned complexities of the constitutional position introduce difficulties to the legal assessment that can be ameliorated. For this purpose, 
defaultI recommend that the Committee: default1) include in its Report a statement of the importance
default of the House of Commons vote of 
default29 August
default 2013 for the identification of the position of the United Kingdom on the lawfulness of the principle of humanitarian intervention; and 2) 
defaultquestion
default the Foreign and Commonwealth Office 
defaulton
default whether, in light of the vo
defaultte, it considers itself bound to 
defaultnot support
default the principle of humanitarian intervention.  
defaultThe importance of legal advicedefault18.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAlthough the Government
default 
default– in particular, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office – is conversant with and long-accustomed to the intricacies of international law-making, the 
defaulthistorically m
defaultore limited role of the House of Commons 
defaultin the field of foreign affairs (particularly military 
defaultaction) 
defaultmeans that the submission of legal advice is even more important to guide and inform the House in its deliberations. Although the question of legality was prominent in the 29 August debate, there is no indication from the record that 
defaultthe Honourable
default Members were
default conscious of the fact that their decision would have the potential effect of defining the legal position of the country on humanitarian intervention for the future. 
default19.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThis underscores the concerns that have been expressed in written and oral e
defaultvidence
default in this inquiry, in particular by Professor Philippe Sands QC, concerning the decision of the Government to submit to the House of Commons only 
defaulta summary of its legal position in its Note
default. I respectfully concur with their views on the unsatisfacto
defaultry nature of the summary presented to the House. It is evident that full, 
defaultoriginal
default legal advice is necessary for the House to consider its position with the benefit of professional guidance. Although I do not comment in detail on the mechanics of achieving
default this result, I emphasise its importance in light of the preceding analysis on the effect of the House of Commons vote in defining the legal position of the United Kingdom. 
default20.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultConsequently, 
defaultI recommend defaultthatdefault the Committeedefault defaultemphasise
default in its Report the importance of the provision of full, 
defaultoriginal
default legal advice to the House in future consultations.
default Although the Prime Minister asserted that the changing practice of submitting a ‘summary of legal advice’ to the House of Commons when consu
defaultlting it upon a proposed military action is sufficient, it is suggested that the importance of the House of Commons vote for defining the legal position of the country militates against this view. Whilst a range of models are being examined by the Committe
defaulte, my own view would be that the submission of the legal advice of the Attorney to the House of Commons as a ministerial statement would ensure the
default professional
default independence and accountability of that advice.
defaultConclusions and summary of recommendationsdefault21.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultI co
defaultnclude that, though it is too soon to reach a definitive conclusion concerning the effect of the House of Commons consultation of 
default29 August
default 2013 on the legal position of the U
defaultnited Kingdom, an initial assessment suggests that the legal position of the Unit
defaulted Kingdom should change as a consequence of the decision of the Government to respect the will of the House of Commons in that vote.
default22.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFor the purpose of clarifying the position, I recommend that the Committee: 1) include in its Report a statement of the im
defaultportance of the House of Commons vote of 
default29 August
default 2013 for the identification of the position of the United Kingdom on the lawfulness of the principle of humanitarian intervention; and 2) solicit a statement from the Foreign and Commonwealth 
defaultOffice concer
defaultning whether, in light of the vote, it considers itself bound to desist from supporting the principle of humanitarian intervention in international fora.  
default23.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultI also recommend that the Committee emphasise in its Report the importance of the provision of full,
default 
defaultoriginal
default legal advice to the House in future consultations in light of its importance to define the legal position of the country.
default09 December 2013
default&#xa0;
default6
default&#xa0;
default Although the vote of the House on the Opposition amendment is also relevant, this submission focuses upon the vote of the Government motion as it directly pertains to its central issue of divergent Government and House of Commons positions on legality.
default 
defaultSee the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969, Part II. 
default The International Law Commission is a committee 
defaultof experts created in 1947 by th
defaulte 
defaultUN General Assembly
default to work for ‘the promotion of the progressive development of international law and its 
defaultcodification’.
default 
default 
default It has been instrumental in the inspiration of a number of important treaties and other works of international law, such as the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982, the 
defaultStatute of the International Criminal Court 1998 and the Articles on the Responsibility of States for Internationally Wrongful Acts 2002. 
default 
defaultExamples of practice include: diplomatic correspondence, policy statements, press releases, opinions of government 
defaultlegal advisers, official manuals on legal questions, comments by government on ILC drafts, national legislation and international and national judicial decisions. See, e.g. – Crawford, 
defaultBrownlie’s Principles of Public International Law 
default(2012), 24.   
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/chemical-weapon-use-by-syrian-regime-uk-government-legal-position
default. 
default 
defaultHC Deb, 29 August 2013
default,
default col.
default 1426.
default 
default 
defaultThe UK legal position gradually shifted from scepticism of the lawfulness of humanitarian intervention to open endorsement of it from August 1992 until the Kosovo air campaign in 1999. See, e.g. - Gray, 
defaultInternational Law and the Use of Forc
defaulte 
default(2008), 35-50.
default E.g. – a scenario akin to the Falkland Islands War of 1982. 
default House of Commons Political and Constitutional Reform Committee, ‘Parliament’s role in conflict decisions: an update’ (Eighth Report of Session 2013-2014, 6 September 2013), p
defaultaras 7-8.
default  
default 
defaultSee further the Written Evidence submitted by Professor Gavin Phillipson, para. 2. 
default HC Deb, 29 August 2013, col 1556. 
default 
defaultIbidem
default, col 1426.
default 
defaultIbidem
default.
default 
defaultIbidem
default, cols 1426-1427, 1429, 1434-1435, 1438-1439, 1441, 1443-1444, 1447, 1453-1455, 1458, 1460, 1462. 
default In this respect, see the Fourth Report of the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Select Committee 2000
default, para. 138
default: ‘
defaultwe conclude that NATO's military action
default [
defaultin Kosovo]
default, if of dubious legality in the current state of international law, was justified on moral grounds
default.’
default 
defaultWritten evidence from Professor Nigel White, para. 23; Written Evidence by Professor Gavin Phillipson, para. 20; 
defaultWritten evidence from Philippe
default Sands QC, para. 17.
default 
default