&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by The Grantham Institute for Climate Change (IPC0032)defaultThe following response has been prepared by Professor Sir Brian Hoskins, CBE FRS, Dr Simon Buckle CMG FIinstP
default and Dr Flora MacTavish, all from the Grantham Institute at Imperial College London.
defaultThe IPCC assessed 
defaultseveral thousand
default peer reviewed scientific papers
default, comprising a high proportion 
defaultof the relevant literature
default.
default The work was carried out by 
defaultmore than 200
default highly qualified authors.
default 
defaultThe IPCC review process was open 
defaultand 
defaulta
defaultny qualified person had the opportunity to comment on the report
default. T
defaulthe IPCC 
defaulttook all 
defaultcomments into account
default, 
defaultdocumenting how
default each comment was handled. 
defaultT
defaulthe c
defaultonclusions 
defaultof the report 
defaultbuild on those of previous assessments
default, and the level of certainty has increased in the fundamentals
default. We know that greenhouse gas levels are rising, 
defaultoverwhelmingly due to anthropogenic emissions
default. As
default a result the climate system is warming 
defaultdue to enhanced radiative forcing, a process that is well understood. The
default ocean is acidifying
default due to 
defaultcarbon dioxide (
defaultCO
default2
default)
default uptake, another process that is well understood
default. As a direct result of warmer temperatures, 
defaultsea levels are rising
default due to thermal expansion
default of water
default and ice loss
default. These processes will continue as greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise. 
defaultAs well as the direct effects mentioned above, 
defaultthere are 
defaultmore complex feedback mechanisms
default in the climate syst
defaultem
default. Feedbacks can be positive (i.e. enhance warming) or negative (reduce warming). There is robust evidence that 
defaultpositive feedbacks
default dominate, meaning that
default future warming can be expected to be 
defaultgreater than
default that given by 
defaultgreenhouse gases 
defaultalone.
default As greenhouse
default gas levels continue to rise, we will see 
defaultwarmer temperatures and more sea level rise.
default 
defaultT
defaulthere is
default 
defaultl
defaultess robustness in
default the
default details of regional climate change and 
defaultshorter term 
defaultchanges
default, i.e.
default on decadal time-scales.
defaultThe c
defaultonsensus
default nature of IPCC means that the r
defaulteport tends to be conservative. 
defaultFor example, 
defaultits
default sea level projections 
defaultare based
default on the lower numbers given by bottom-up calculations
default and 
defaultwhile l
defaultarger values cannot be excluded, 
defaultthe IPCC explicitly says that 
defaultcurrent scientific understanding is insufficient
default 
defaultfor evaluating their probability
default. Also as t
defaulthe model results available
default do not yet include estimates of the uncertain greenhouse gas emissions from melting permafrost, the projections of future warming do not include this enhancement of warming.
defaultIn addition
default to the above, w
defaulte understand that in responding to 
defaultgovernment requests 
defaultduring a very short period of discussion, some minor errors
default were made
default 
defaultin the 
defaultSPM
default, published
default on 27 September 2013.  These have now been corrected.  An explanation and our assessment of t
defaulthe significance of these changes can be found at 
defaulthttp://wwwf.imperial.ac.uk/blog/climate-at-imperial/2013/11/13/updates-to-the-ip
defaultcc-wg1-summary-for-policy-makers/
default . 
defaultThe
default InterAcademy Council (IAC)
default 
defaultundertook a review of the processes and procedures of the IPCC. It found 
defaultin its 2010 report
default  
defaultthat the IPCC process had been successful overall but that the IPCC needed to continue to adapt. It made a
default series of recommendations
default w
defaulthich,
default 
defaulti
defaultf ado
defaultpted in their entirety, would fundamentally reform IPCC’s management structure while enhancing its ability to conduct an authoritative assessment.
default  
defaultThe IPCC finalised its decisions in response to the IAC review in May 2011 and the IAC issued a statement sa
defaultying that it was “pleased that so many of our report’s 
defaultrecommendations were adopted” and that it hoped its report “will continue to inform management of the IPCC”
default. 
defaultAs recommended by the IAC, the AR5 WG1 team have used a qualitative “level of understanding
default” scale in the SPM and TS as well as quantified measures of uncertainty and statements of fact.  
default 
defaultFurther improvements could be made by ensuring
default that confidence ranges are comparable across different Assessment Reports.  The ranges in AR5 did not always al
defaultlow for simple comparison with the conclusions of AR4 in all cases, e.g. the ranges for the Transient Climate response. 
defaultMuch depends on which conclusions are meant here.  Our understanding o
defaultf the greenhouse effect is well founded on fundamental physical principles.  The
default global 
defaultresponse of the climate system to this forcing is clear in terms of 
defaultits 
defaultdirection
default.
default 
defaultT
defaulthe pace and scale
default of this change
default in part depends on future greenhouse gas emissions 
defaultas well as the reaction of
default,
default and interaction
defaults
default between
default,
default the different parts of the climate system
default. Climate feedbacks
default can act to amplify or moderate the effect greenhouse gas
default forcing
default.  The assessed likely range of both the Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity and 
defaultthe Transient Climate Response reflects some narrowing down of the uncertainties due to these feedbacks
default.
default 
defaultF
defaultor example, an ECS greater than 6°C for a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide is now considered very unlikely
default&#xa0;
default– a much strong statement than the equivalent in AR4. However, further significant narrowing of these metrics for climate change is likely to b
defaulte very hard to achieve.  
defaultKnowledge about key climate feedback mechanisms, such as the effect of clouds, has improved but remains incomplete. Nevertheless there is no evidence of a mechanism that would significantly reduce the intensity of the projected cl
defaultimate change by 2100.  We have less confidence in projected near-term changes which are likely to remain heavily influenced by internal variability as well as change.  
defaultIn part, this is because the o
defaultbservation systems needed for monitoring changes in the de
defaultep ocean have only become available over the past decade or so. Nor do they yet provide complete coverage throughout the depth and extent of the ocean, which due to its huge thermal inertia is the dominant influence on the pace of climate change.  
defaultThe AR5 WG1 report has reviewed and assessed a 
defaultvery large
default number of scientific papers
default. There was
default an open review system
default and all comments were taken into account
default.  We judge that
default the report
default is representative of the range of views among climate scientists, though there are likely to be 
defaultindividual scientists 
defaultwho would reach different judgements on aspects of the report. 
defaultArguably, the conclusions of the AR5 WG1 report are conservative in terms
default of several potential mechanisms that could give rise to more significant changes 
defaultthan current models
default project.
default 
defaultFuture 
defaultrelease of methane from melting permafrost was 
defaultnot considered
default,
default and estimates of sea level rise were 
defaultperhaps
default conservative. 
defaultThe models thems
defaultelves have been developed in the context of the current climate system; they may be inadequate guides to potentially non-linear changes in the climate should we continue to force the system to the extent that seems likely without strong mitigation action. 
default All this argues for more, rather than less, caution in terms of the potential severity and impacts of future climate change. 
defaultOur understanding of
default the greenhouse effect is extremely well founded on fundamental physical principles.  The response of the climate system to this human forcing is also very clear from many observations of different aspects of the climate system.  There 
defaultis in our view 
defaultno re
defaultal question that the climate is changing, and that a significant part of these chan
defaultges is due to human greenhouse 
defaultgas 
defaultemissions
default.  The clear conclusion is that humans are conducting a dangerous experiment with the Earth’s climate. 
defaultOf course, it is hard to say that anything is 
defaultever 
defaultcompletely “settled” in science
default. However,
default there is 
defaultnow 
defaultvery firm evidence 
defaultthat
default 
defaultgreenhouse gas levels are increasing
default;
default 
defaultradiative forcing is increasing;
default 
defaultatmospheric, oceanic and surface air 
defaulttemperature
defaults
default are
default r
defaultising
default;
default sea level is rising
default;
default and ice 
defaults
defaultheets and glaciers are losing mass globally
default.
default In addition, t
defaulthere is 
defaultnow 
defaultstrong evidence that 
defaultGreen
defaultland and W
defaultest
default Antarctic ice sheet 
defaultreductions 
defaultare 
defaultcontributing
default significantly
default to s
defaultea level rise.
default Recent observations suggest that they are now nearly as 
defaultimportant
default as thermal expansion as a cause of sea level rise.
default 
defaultOn the other hand, r
defaultegional climate change and decadal variations depend on science that is still relatively young an
defaultd
default in need of signific
defaultant development.
defaultThere is a clear need for scaled up efforts to measure and monitor the climate system so that we can improve our understanding still further of the climate system response
default to human emissions.  
defaultBoth satellite and in
default 
defaultsitu 
defaultmeasurements
default are needed, particularly in the ocean. 
defaultFurthermore the unique information contained in 
defaultthe measured 
defaultspectra 
defaultof solar and outgoing infrared radiation could 
defaultbe used to understand which climate com
defaultponents are
default 
defaultthe cause of the changes observed and thus provide a 
defaultmore 
defaultstringent
default 
defaulttest of the climate models used to predict 
defaultbetter 
defaulthow our climate will
default 
defaultevolve.
default Further work is needed to improve our understanding of clouds and aerosols.
default There also needs to b
defaulte more work to improve our understanding of 
defaulthow 
defaultthe atmospheric circu
defaultlation and 
defaultregional 
defaultweather systems
default may change as the climate warms
default.
defaultIn a scientific context, uncertainty is the correct concept.  In terms of making decisions, either in politics or business, the concept of risk is potentially far more useful.  
defaultIn informing policy and the public, scientists working in this area should be a
defaults objective as they possibly can about the level of risk where there is uncertainty or less than full understanding. 
defaultRisks to human society and the biosphere are expected to be covered in t
defaulthe IPCC Working Group II Report
default.
defaultThe IPCC AR5 WG1 dedicates one whole chapter of its report (Chapter 9) to the evaluation of climate models.  
defaultThe summary to this chapter gives a fair assessment of the improvements made by climate modellers since the last Assessment r
defaulteport (AR4) as well as the remaining challenges.  For example, t
defaulthe AR5 
defaultWG1 TS 
defaultsuggests that some models may be too responsive to the effects of greenhouse gases.  
defaultWe do not yet 
defaultfully and quantitatively understand the mechanisms responsible for the recent s
defaultlowdown in surface warming
default (see our answer to Q9 for further comment)
default. 
defaultWe agree however, with the key conclusion of the authors of Chapter 9 that
default,
default “
defaultClimate and Earth System models are based on physical principles, and they reproduce many important aspects
default of observed climate. Both aspects contribute to our confidence in the models’ suitability for their application in detection and attribution studies (Chapter 10) and for quantitative future predictions and projections.
default”
defaultThis does not imply bind acceptance
default of the results from the current models: continual questioning of the results and improvements in the models is crucial.
defaultThe reduction in
default global surface temperature rise since 1998 is the topic for a good scientific discussion in AR5 in terms of the forcing of the climate system and its natural variability.  In the period, the
default 
defaultenergy imbalance of the atmosphere due to the high level of gree
defaultnhouse gases has been somewhat 
defaultreduced 
defaultdue to t
defaulthe solar minimum and some 
defaultminor volcanic eruptions.
default 
defaultThe fact that more than 90 percent of the additional net energy entering the climate system is stored in the ocean and only a few percent directly warms the 
defaultatmosphere is discussed, and the AR5 gives evidence that the sub-surface ocean has continued to warm
default. Since the cut-off date for the publishing of articles assessed by 
defaultthe IPCC
default, more evidence has become available 
defaultfor
default the continued warming of the 
defaultdeeper
default oce
defaultan and the likely storage of the excess heat there
default, and that this is probably the dominant cause of the reduction in global temperature rise in the past 15 years
default.
defaultThe empirical and theoretical evidence for climate change 
defaultdue to human activity 
defaultis extremely 
defaultstrong, with multiple independent lines of evidence.
default Given the 
defaultchanges observed in other components of the climate system, notably the continued increase in heat stored in the deeper parts of the ocean, the slowdown in the rate of increase in the average g
defaultlobal mean surface temperature in the recent period should not be interpreted as evidence that we do not need to be concerned about the risks of climate change. 
defaultWeather-related events already impose significant costs on
default society, despite a high degree of adaptation to the current climate.  Particular modes of climate variability, such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), may be associated with distinct and sometimes damaging patterns of weather.  The seasonal monso
defaultons on which many people depend for their livelihoods can also cause significant damage and loss of life.  The 
defaultfrequency
default of at least some weather related hazards is likely to change
default 
defaultsignifican
defaultt
defaultly
default, though the 
defaultnatural variability of climate is
default likely to rema
defaultin important in some regions into the second half of the century
default.  
defaultIncreasing sea-levels will pose significant risks for low-lying coastal cities, e.g. from increased risks of flooding due to storm surges. 
defaultOver the six years between AR4 and AR5, the core 
defaultscience has become
default even firmer. The risk posed by continued
default greenhouse gas
default emissions is just as large as 
defaultat the time of the previous report
default. The AR5 for the first time makes it clear that there is a specific, limited amount of CO
default2
default that can be emitted if 
defaultth
defaulte 2
default°
defaultC limit is not to be exceeded
default with a given probability
default. This 
defaultmakes effective action to reduce the level of greenhouse gas emissions – at national and international levels - 
defaulteven more 
defaulturgent
default.
default 
defaultWG1 is strictly an assessment of the 
defaultcurre
defaultnt state of the 
defaultphysical science
defaults
default 
defaultwith respect to climate change. Furthermore, it 
defaultseeks to make sure that the 
default“
defaultrange of scientific views, as represented in the peer-reviewed literature, is considered and evaluated in the assessment, and that the state of t
defaulthe science is conc
defaultisely and accurately presented”. 
defaultIt has done a credible job in the chapters and T
defaultechnical 
defaultS
defaultummary
default.  
defaultThe 
default“Summary for Policy Makers”
default (SPM)
default has to be agreed by government representatives.  The diversity of government interests amongst the p
defaultarticipating nations suggests that it would be extremely difficult to push a political agenda or to include 
defaultpolicy-relevant 
defaultstatements that were not fully supported by the evidence.  
defaultThere might however be pressure to make statements in a form that presen
defaultts a finding in a particular context. For example, in SPA Section A, the SPM says that “
defaultEach of the last three decades has been successively warmer at the Earth’s surface
default”.  Yet this emphasis on decadal temperature changes is, we believe, ill-advised.  In 
defaultthe context of climate change, 
defaultrelatively 
defaultshort-term 
defaultindices of the state of the climate system 
defaulthave little relevance.  It is quite conceivable for there to be a future decade in which the Earth’s surface temperature cools
default even with continued climate chang
defaulte. 
defaultT
defaulthe UK 2050 
defaultgreenhouse gas
default 
defaultemissions 
defaulttarget 
defaultwas based on calculated temperatures increases associated with a range of global greenhouse gas emissions trajectories
default. They showed that to satisfy the two criteria of a 50:50 chance of staying near 2
default°
defaultC and a 
defaultnegligible chance of reaching 4
default°
defaultC it was necessary to at least halve global emissions from a 1990 level by 2050. The results and projections in the AR5 
defaultgive strong support for the idea
default that halving global emissions by 2050 is indeed necessary for satisfact
defaultion of the two climate change criteria. The carbon budget perspective in AR5 shows the constraint on the total 
defaultCO
default2
default 
defaultemissions in the 21st century if such targets are to be achieved. Emissions reductions early in the century may lessen the necessity for stri
defaultngent (and perhaps impossible) actions such as negative total emissions later in the century. Consistent with this the UK should aim to perform as much reduction as it can well before 2050. The Fourth Carbon Budget in the UK, which was derived on the basis
default of a least cost path to the UK 2050 target, is therefore even more important. The global carbon budget view 
defaultmight even
default 
defaultsuggest that 
defaultthe UK target 
defaultshould even be tightened if 
defaultth
defaultis
default 
defaultwere possible.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default