&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted defaultbydefault defaultthe University of Readingdefault (IPC0035)default1.
default              
defaultThe 
defaultDepartment of Meteorology at the University of Reading
default is one of the world’s leading centres for research into meteorology and the climate system
default, and the University’s Walker Institute
default links climate scientists with other researchers and the wider stakeholder community
default. Academics in the Department have been i
defaultnvolved in all IPCC Working Group I assessments, as Coordinating Lead Authors, Lead Authors and Review Editors
default. This submission was prepared by a group of scientists
default f
defaultrom the Department
default.
defaultEXECUTIVE SUMMARY
default2.
default              
defaultIn our view, the conclusions of the 
defaultIPCC 5
defaultth
default Assessment Report
default Working Group 1 
default(
defaultClimate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis
default, 
defaulthereafter referred to as 
defaultAR5
default WG1)
default are robust and consistent with the scientific evidence. The IPCC process is robust 
defaultby design 
defaultand represents the views and research findin
defaultgs presented in the peer-reviewed scientific literature. Being consensual, there is a tendency for conclusions to be more conservative than those which would be reached in a more conventional small-group peer review exercise. The IPCC process has itself ge
defaultnerated new scientific advances, primarily through stimulating the research community to undertake and learn from model intercomparison exercises.
default3.
default              
defaultThe AR5 WG1 report affirms in stronger language than in AR4 the past and future effects of increasing gree
defaultnhouse gas emissions, 
defaultproviding additional information for policymakers in considering the nature and extent of climate change mitigation and adaptation policies.
default4.
default              
defaultThe evidence reviewed in the AR5 WG1 report reaffirms the evidence available at the time o
defaultf the setting of the UK’s Fourth Carbon Budget.  
default5.
default              
defaultThe AR5 WG1 report considered the apparent “hiatus” in the rise in global average surface temperature, and its conclusions are consistent with the scientific evidence and data available at the time. Howe
defaultver, this is a rapidly developing area of inquiry.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSUBMISSION
defaultHow robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report? Have the IPCC adequately addresse
defaultd
default criticisms of previous reports? How much scope is there to question the report’s conclusions? 
default6.
default              
defaultIt is our view that the AR5 WG1 report represents a robust evaluation of the available scientific literature. 
defaultA key part of the IPCC assessment is to disting
defaultuish 
defaulthigher confidence
default conclusions from the more unresolved aspects of our 
defaultscientific understanding 
defaultof the climate system and climate change
default in which confidence is lower
default. The distinction is made within the IPCC report by its use of terminology that reflect
defaults quantitative levels of likelihood and scientific confidence. On the whole, we believe that the adopted terminology adequately reflects the level of scientific consensus that prevailed at the time the report was written. The fact that a large component of
default recent climate change is a consequence of human-driven changes in atmospheric composition is an example of a robust conclusion. In contrast, 
defaultgaps in scientific knowledge limit our confidence in predictions of future regional precipitation changes. 
default&#xa0;
default7.
default              
defaultSo
defaultme c
defaultriticisms of previous Working Group I reports focused on the review process, and the 
defaultimportant 
defaultrole of review editors
default in overseeing the review process
default has been re-affirmed
default in AR5
default. Government review comments have again played a strong part in improving 
defaultupon the second-order draft.  
default&#xa0;
default8.
default              
defaultThe conclusions that the report describes as “(very)
default 
defaulthigh confidence” are unlikely to change significantly in future reports.
default 
defaultThose areas of climate science that are characterised in the report as having lower confidence 
default 
defaultare challenged on a regular basis, and the challenges that stand the test of time are integrated in the following report, reflecting the normal scientific process. Indeed, studies challenging some of the AR5 
defaultWG1 
defaultconclusions are already appearing in the sc
defaultientific literature, often in high impact journals. We are unaware of any barrier that prevents scientists wishing to question the IPCC assessment in the 
defaultpeer-reviewed 
defaultscientific literature
default.
defaultTo what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate 
defaultscientists?
default9.
default              
defaultThe IPCC review process seems a robust mechanism for ensuring that the range of well-found views (one requirement of which is publication in the scientific literature) is adequately represented. If the IPCC chapter teams should have neglecte
defaultd relevant studies, then the two phases of open review process, the responses to which are overseen by Review Editors, should ensure that significant and relevant studies were represented in subsequent revisions. This is of course reliant on a widespread i
defaultnvolvement in the review process by the community as a whole, but the statistics presented by IPCC indicate a good level of involvement. 
defaultCan any of the areas of the science now be considered settled as a result of AR5’s publication, if so which?
default&#xa0;
default What 
defaultareas need further effort to reduce the levels of uncertainty?
default10.
default              
defaultMany of the basics of climate science (such as the fact that increased levels of greenhouse gases will lead to a warming of the climate system) had been established in earlier assessments
default and so 
defaultare 
defaultconsidered largely settled
default.
default There is sufficient confidence in many of the observed changes in the climate since 1950 for these to be presented as facts.
default 
defaultLike many scientific areas, progress in climate science is steady and incremental, so it is
default difficult to identify 
defaultnew 
defaultareas which have be
defaultcome
default completely settled in AR5
default WG1
default, although many areas were identified in which confidence in our understanding had increased
default, for example
default the attribution of the warming since 1950 to anthropogenic causes
default. It 
defaultis important to stress that IPCC assessments do not do research, but rather 
defaultreport research that is already available in the scientific literature. There is a multitude of areas where further research, by the community as a whole, is required to reduce unc
defaultertainty. These include the continued need to monitor the climate system, the role of cloud feedbacks in determining the magnitude of climate change, the role of aerosol particles in modifying cloud properties
default,
default and the need to improve confidence in more re
defaultgional-scale climate predictions. This list is by no means exhaustive.
defaultHow effective is AR5 and the summar
defaulty for policymakers in conveying
default what is meant by 
defaultuncertainty in scientific terms
default? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?
default11.
default 
defaultAR5 WG1
default, including its 
defaultSummary for Policymakers (SPM)
default, 
defaultuse
defaults
default 
defaultclearly and carefully defined
default language to express uncertainty through a combination of scientific confidence and likelihood. Scientific confidence is expressed as being low to very high, depending upon t
defaulthe amount of available evidence and the level of agreement between multiple lines of evidence. Where likelihoods have been estimated these are expressed using terms such as ‘very uncertain’, ‘likely’ and ‘virtually certain’ which correspond to specific pro
defaultbability ranges. We believe this combination of qualitative and quantitative measures is an effective means of conveying the uncertainty in the scientific conclusions of the AR5 
defaultWG1
default, given the diverse nature of the scientific evidence being assessed.
default&#xa0;
default12. If risk is interpreted to mean the likelihood of an outcome which is considered to be of high consequence, then any of the likelihood statements of the AR5 
defaultWG1 
defaultthat refer to thresholds can be straightforwardly translated into statements of risk. For ex
defaultample, the 
defaultAR5 
defaultWG1 
defaultSPM
default statement that cumulative carbon emissions need to be kept below 1000 PgC in order for global warming relative to pre-industrial times to likely not exceed 2
default
defaultC, implies that there is a 33% risk of global warming exceeding 2
default
defaultC under t
defaulthese conditions. Since the likelihood statements in the AR5 
defaultWG1 
defaultare all based on probabilistic calculations, it should in principle be straightforward to obtain risks of exceeding particular thresholds from those calculations. However, the AR5 only estimat
defaulted likelihoods for statements where the scientific confidence is fairly high. This reflects the conservative nature of the assessment, since it would not have been possible to obtain a consensus on likelihoods of outcomes where the scientific confidence is
default fairly
default low. 
defaultFor example, the likelihood of
default increases in intense tropical cyclone activity, or increases in intensity and/or duration of drought, 
defaultwas not assessed in the near-
defaultterm; 
defaultfor the long-term 
default(end of the 21
defaultst
default century)
default the likelihood of such increase
defaults 
defaultwas only
default assessed in certain regions of the world, and without quantifying
default the extent of the 
defaultlikely increases
default. Yet policy-makers are presumably interested in such risks, because the consequences would be significant. Assessment of risk in areas where sci
defaultentific confidence is low would therefore be useful, but would probably have to come from a 
defaultmechanism other than the IPCC.
default&#xa0;
defaultDoes the AR5 address the reliability of climate models?
default13
default. 
defaultYes: there is an entire chapter dedicated to the topic. 
defaultHas AR5 
defaultsufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?
default14.
default              
defaultThe widely reported hiatus in 
defaultthe rise in 
defaultglobal 
defaultmean 
defaultsurface temperature was a rapidly developing research topic while the AR5 
defaultWG1 
defaultwas being
default written. While there were certainly many papers to assess, the topic was nowhere near as mature as most of the other topics covered in the report. Furthermore the observations of ocean heat content and radiative forcing were not adequate to obtain a compl
defaultete picture, given the short time scale of the phenomenon from a climate perspective. On the topic of the hiatus the AR5 
defaultW
defaultG
default1 
defaultwas essentially forced to serve as a climate bulletin, dealing with a breaking event, which is not what it was designed to do. Unde
defaultr these circumstances the AR5 authors 
defaultadequately assesse
defaultd
default the scientific evidence available at the time
default, recognizing that the picture would almost certainly evolve in the future. 
defaultIs the IPCC process an effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledg
defaulte? Or has it focussed on providing a justification for political commitment?
default15.
default              
defaultThe IPCC scientific assessments are a large-scale undertaking. Author teams, and especially the co-ordinating lead authors, are committed to prolonged and deep involvement (vi
defaulta successive lead author meetings, through various cycles of producing draft chapters and via the need to respond to the many review comments). Thus it requires these scientists, and their employing institutes, to take on this significant workload. 
default&#xa0;
default16.
default              
defaultT
defaulthe resulting assessment chapters are certainly comprehensive in their coverage of their area, describe in detail how the area has evolved since the previous assessment, and discuss where the most important uncertainties remain. The chapters remain an impor
defaulttant resource for the scientific community for many years after they are produced.  In that sense, they certainly are highly effective, recognizing the effort required to produce them is immense. 
default&#xa0;
default17.
default              
defaultWe note that the IPCC assessments do differ from criti
defaultcal reviews of the scientific literature as would be produced by (normally) small author teams and mediated by the standard peer review procedure used by learned journals. In that case, authors have much more freedom to define the scope of their reviews an
defaultd are able to be more radical and forthright in their assessment and critique of the literature. By contrast, in order to carry entire chapter teams together, and to satisfy the many review comments, IPCC assessments are normally more consensual and conser
defaultvative in their nature. 
default&#xa0;
default18.
default              
defaultAs part of the preparations for the recent assessments, the community has also voluntarily undertaken large-scale intercomparisons of both observational datasets and outputs from climate models, generated by many institutes ac
defaultross the world. These intercomparisons have generated much new information, pointed to areas where understanding is robust
default. They have also
default provided a stimulus and motivation for understanding the differences that emerge from these intercomparisons, a proce
defaultss that lasts for many years following the assessment.  Without the impetus of the IPCC assessments it is unlikely that these intercomparisons would be so comprehensive. An example of the value of the intercomparisons is that projections of the patterns of
default future temperature change are quite robust amongst climate models but, by contrast, the projections of patterns of precipitation change are not. The intercomparison process places a significant burden on the science community. For the next assessment, it 
defaultwill be important to assess 
defaultwhether the scope of future intercomparisons could be scaled back to make them more manageable, so that resource is not distracted away from other activities in the individual institutes. 
default&#xa0;
default19.
default              
defaultThe assessments present policy-rel
defaultevant advice, and the policymakers provide input on the overall structure of the reports
default and review drafts
default. However they do not dictate the nature of any policy-relevant advice that emerges from the process, which is based, as it should be, on the prevaili
defaultng scientific view at the time of the assessment. 
defaultTo what extent did political intervention influence the final conclusions of the AR5 Physical Science Basis summary? 
default20.
default              
defaultPolicymakers were able to input review comments to the second-order draft and in th
defaulte final plenary sessions in Stockholm
default in September 2013
default. We believe that on the whole, this input was a positive one that led to greater clarity of presentation in the conclusions, and the wide spectrum of political viewpoints would have prevented any over
defaulttly political influence from one sector.
default We are not aware of any evidence that political intervention influenced the final conclusions. 
defaultDo the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent 
defaultdangerous climate change?
default 
defaultWhat implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally? 
default21.
default              
defaultThe IPCC AR5 Working Group I report concludes that there is more convincing evid
defaultence that humans are influencing the climate than was available at the time of the AR4 in 2007. This is based not only on longer series of observations, but also on a larger body of refereed literature. The report also concludes that continued emissions wi
defaultll cause further warming and that
default any efforts to 
defaultlimit climate change will require substantial and sustained reductions of greenhouse gas emissions. These conclusions are also phrased in stronger language than in AR4. Correcting for the different baseline 
defaultperiod, the AR5 mean estimate of change in temperature at the end of the 21
defaultst
default century under the highest forcing (RCP8.5) is very similar to the highest change presented in AR4. 
defaultThe mean estimate of the temperature change using the lowest forcing in AR5 (us
defaulting RCP2.6) is lower than the lowest 
defaultmean 
defaultchange in AR4, 
defaultbut this is because the lowest emissions pathways considered explicitly assume very stringent controls on emissions – unlike the lowest scenario used in AR4.
defaultIs the rate at which the UK Government 
defaultintends to cut CO
default2
default emissions appropriate in light of the findings of the IPCC AR5 Physical Science Basis report? What relevance do the IPCC’s conclusions have in respect of the review of the fourth Carbon Budget? 
default22.
default              
defaultThe 
defaultIPCC 
defaultAR5 
defaultWG1 report
default has progressed by including results from advanced carbon cycle models that simulate the budgets of carbon in the atmosphere, land vegetation and soil, and the ocean. The only scenario presented in which it is likely that 
defaultglobal average surface 
defaulttemperature
default rises will remain below 2 degrees was the most stringent (RCP2.6). The carbon cycle models confirm that very large decreases in global carbon emissions, declining to around or below zero by the end of the century, are needed for this scenario. The corresp
defaultonding maximum total carbon 
defaultemission to achieve this goal is
default 1000 GtC of which 445 to 585 GtC have already been emitted. Thus the latest science 
defaultfrom the IPCC reconfirms the scientific evidence that was available at the time the 4th carbon budget was set.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default www.met.reading.ac.uk
default www.walker-institute.ac.uk
default Professor Nigel Arnell (Director, Walker Institute), Dr Nicolas Bellouin, Professor Bill Collins, Pr
defaultofessor Ted Shepherd (Grantham Professor of Climate Science), Dr Len Shaffrey, and Professor Keith Shine (Regius Professor of Meteorology and Climate Science). 
default