&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1. 
defaultI am a climate researcher and Professor of Geosystem Science in the University of Oxford
default’s
default School of Geography and the Environ
defaultment and Department 
defaultof Physics
default. 
defaultI have served as a lead author on detection of climate change and attribution of causes in the Third and Fifth Assessments (2001 &amp; 2013) and as Review Editor on Global Climate Projections fo
defaultr t
defaulthe Fourth Assessment (2007). I
default 
defaulthave recently criticized the IPCC practice of producing exhaustive Assessments on a 6-year cycle
default because I did not feel it best served the interests of the governments whom IPCC is intended to inform, and represented an excessive burden on the scientific c
defaultommunity. C
defaultontrary to some reports, I did not call for the IPCC itself to be closed down
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHow robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report? Have the IPCC adequately addressed criticisms of previous reports? How much scope is there 
defaultto question of the report’s conclusions?
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultCore factual conclusions of the AR5 are broadly in line with national and independent scientific assessments of the climate issue and consistent with current evidence and understanding. 
defaultNo scientific document is
default infallible, and the process of multiple authorship and review does not guarantee 
defaultinfallibility. In addressing criticisms of previous reports, the focus has been on making the review process more bureaucratic and further tightening the criteria for inclusi
defaulton and exclusion of material. 
default&#xa0;
default3. 
defaultIn my view, th
defaulte suggestion that a formal process can itself guarantee the 
defaultabsolute 
defaultaccuracy of a
defaultny
default document and put its conclusions beyond question is a misrepresentation of the way science works. 
defaultIt is often suggested th
defaultat, because they have been restricted
default to p
defaulteer-reviewed sources and passed
default through multiple stages of review, the 
defaultIPCC’s conclusions are beyond 
defaultreasonable doubt
default. This is misleading, because it focuses attention on the process, rather than the evidence itsel
defaultf (indeed, the thrust of the committee’s questions does raise con
defaultcerns that the committee 
defaulthas allowed itself to be misled in this regard).
default&#xa0;
default4. 
defaultHaving been involved in three IPCC assessment cycles, I do not see that the measures taken since the 2007 report 
defaulthave significantly altered the robustness of core conclusions
default, 
defaultbecause these were already
default as robust as any scientific assessment process could make them. The committee should be aware that the importance of errors in previous assessments has been wildly ex
defaultaggerated. 
default&#xa0;
default5. 
defaultNo one has ever argued that errors 
defaultdeep
default in the 
defaultImpacts section of the 
default2007 Assessment had any 
defaultinfluence
default whatever on 
defaultthat report
default’
defaults
default core scientific co
defaultnclusions
default. 
defaultI can attest that 
defaultthe 
defaultauthors of the 
defaultGlobal Climate Projections chapter
default of Working Group 1 were completely unaware of the suggestion that Himalayan glaciers would disappear by 2035
default when we were formulating our conclusions
default – indeed it was a Working Group 1 author who firs
defaultt drew attention to this error.
default&#xa0;
default6. Likewise, 
defaultI can also
default confirm that 
defaultthe particular reconstruction of Northern Hemisphere temperatures over the past millennium
default (the so-called “Hockey Stick”), which subsequently came in for considerable criticism, was not in any way central to the conclusions of the 2001 Assess
defaultment regarding attribution of 
defaultcauses of
default recent
default warming. We were aware of these
default proxy climate reconstructions, but did not give them much weight in the attribution ass
defaultessment because the statistical methods
default used were 
default(and arguably still are) rather opaque. 
defaultI remember specific discussions among the attribution chapter authors questioning the error 
defaultbudgets
default of tho
defaultse reconstructions, and concluding that it would be premature to 
defaultrely
default on them
default 
defaulttoo 
defaultheavily
default. With the benefit of hindsight, these discussions seem remar
defaultkable prescient, and confirm the importance of scientific judgment in the IPCC process.
default 
default&#xa0;
default7. The problem with 
defaultIPCC’s response 
defaultto criticis
defaultms of previous assessments is that the focus has been entirely on formalizing procedures, whereas the reports ultimatel
defaulty depend on the collective scientific judgment of IPCC authors and reviewers. In some respects
default,
default tighter procedures may
default even
default have a distorting effect, particularly when coupled with the infrequency of IPCC reports. For example, I am aware of two papers (on 
defaultone of which I was a co-author) being accepted on the day of the deadline for inclusion in the IPCC 5
defaultth
default Assessment, both of which provided evidence for a downward revision of the uncertainty range for climate sensitivity. A third paper, providing evidence 
defaultfor a higher value for climate sensitivity, was accepted two days later, and hence could not be included. The fact that the first two papers and not the third contribute to the 
defaultofficial 
defaultconsensus view on climate sensitivity for the next six years is clearl
defaulty absurd.
default&#xa0;
defaultTo what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate scientists?
default&#xa0;
default8. 
defaultIn chapters 
defaultthat 
defaultI have been involved in I have seen a painstaking effort to reflect the full range of views among climate scientists. If anything, authors 
defaultprobably
default take more
default care to 
defaultdiscuss and 
defaultreflect ‘skeptical’ 
defaultthan ‘alarmist’ 
defaultviews, for obvious reasons. The 
defaultreputational cost of being seen as naïve or politically motivated is far greater than the cost of being seen as over-cautious.
default&#xa0;
defaultCan any of the areas of the s
defaultcience now be considered settled as a result of AR5’s publication, if so which?  What areas need further effort to reduce the levels of uncertainty
default?
default&#xa0;
default9. It is unhealthy to declare any area of science finally settled: I welcome the fact that there are still
default a few scientists questioning the theory of relativity, although I feel no inclination to join them. Likewise, the fact that 
defaultgreenhouse gas emissions are
default having 
defaulta substantial
default impact on climate at a global scale is sufficiently well attested that further research into 
defaultalternative hypotheses is unlikely to be particularly fruitful, although it should 
defaultof course be 
defaultencouraged
default to
default continue. 
default&#xa0;
default10. The most obvious and important area 
defaultin which further effort is required to reduce uncertainty is the implications of these global changes for regional climate and extreme weather events. It is shameful, in my view, that we are still unable as a community to quantify the role of human influen
defaultce on high-impact 
defaultevents like Typhoon Haiyan. The IPCC process may inadvertently have contributed to this situation through its focus (mandated by the commissioning governments) on long-term projections of global climate change, which are necessarily relia
defaultnt on coarse-resolution models.
default&#xa0;
defaultHow effective is AR5 and the summary
default for policymakers in conveying 
defaultwhat is meant by 
defaultuncertainty in scientific terms
default? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?
default&#xa0;
default11. This is a question for a user of IPCC 
defaultreports rather than an author.
default&#xa0;
defaultDoes the AR5 address the reliability of climate models?
default&#xa0;
default12. 
defaultThis question is so broad that almost any answer is possible. Yes, the IPCC does consider the reliability of climate models and finds they are much more reliable f
defaultor some variables (like global temperature) than others (like local precipitation). 
defaultIf the question is posed as “are the models reliable in all respects”, the answer is trivially “no”. 
defaultThe global coupled climate models that form the backbone of these asses
defaultsments are found to be consistently unreliable in their representation of extreme weather, which is the main reason we are unable to say more
default at present
default about human influence on weather extremes. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHas AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the wide
defaultly reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?
default&#xa0;
default13. The AR5 has demonstrated there are a number of possible reasons for the hiatus and concluded that there is insufficient evidence to attribute it to any specific cause. Temperature trends ove
defaultr a 15-year period have limited relevance to constraining long-term climate projections
default, and average temperatures over the past decade have been precisely in line with projections made back in the 1990s
default. That said, the fact that the very rapid warming betw
defaulteen the mid-1990s and the 
defaultfirst half of the
default 2000s 
defaulthas not continued does provide some evidence that the highest responses in the current generation of climate models are unrealistic, and this is reflected in the AR5 projections of near-term warming
default. It als
defaulto
default contributed 
defaultto 
default(although it was not the main factor
default in) 
defaultthe decision to reduce the lower bound of Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity to 1.5 degrees
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultDo the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to
default prevent dangerous climate change?
default&#xa0;
default14. 
defaultThe key conclusion that strengthens the case for some actions to prevent dangerous climate change is the fact that cumulative emissions of carbon dioxide emissions over the entire industrial epoch are the main determ
defaultinant of eventual warming, not emissions in any given year or commitment period. This highlights the importance of policies to address the long-term stock of fossil carbon, as opposed to measures to control the flow of greenhouse gas emissions that are the
default focus of 
defaultalmost all climate policies at present.
default 
default&#xa0;
default15. As an aside, it seems 
defaultstrange
default to ask about the economic implications of a report that is explicitly 
defaultand exclusively 
defaultfocused on Physical Science. 
defaultThis question might be more appropriate when the Assess
defaultments of Working Groups 2 and 3 are available.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally?
default&#xa0;
default16. 
defaultBoth UK and international climate policy are exclusively f
defaultocused on reducing 
defaultthe flow of 
defaultemissions in the relatively short term, out to 2030 or so. This is resulting in a dangerous underinvestment in technologies like carbon capture and sequestration 
default(CCS) 
defaultthat are relatively expensive as short-term emission redu
defaultction measures. These technologies will
default, however,
default almost certainly be required eventually if we are to limit warming to two or even three degrees, given the overwhelming economic incentives to burn more fossil fuels than can be released into the atmosphere
default consistent with these temperature goals.
default&#xa0;
defaultIs the IPCC process an effective mechanism for a
defaultssessing scientific knowledge? Or has it focus
defaulted on providing a justification for political commitment?
default&#xa0;
default17. The response of 
defaultparticipants in 
defaultthe UNFCCC process 
defaultto 
defaultthe cumulative carbon budget conclusion is very instructive. Negotiators have been openly critical of the IPCC for what they see as an “unhelpful framing” of the problem. This illustrates that the IPCC is doing its job of highlighting important policy-rele
defaultvant science, not simply providing justification for any particular political decision.
default&#xa0;
defaultTo what extent did political intervention influence the final conclusions of the AR5 Physical Science Basis summary?
default&#xa0;
default18. I was not involved in the Stockholm plenary, 
defaultbut the revisions agreed following the final government review stage did not impact the core conclusions of the report.
default&#xa0;
defaultIs the rate at which the UK Government intends to cut CO2 emissions appropriate in light of the findings of the IPCC AR5 Physical Scien
defaultce Basis report?
default&#xa0;
default19. The problem is not so much the rate as the manner of these reductions. 
defaultThe AR5 report highlights the critical importance of option value. 
defaultT
defaulthere has been no substantial reduction in the overall 
defaultuncer
defaulttainty in the climate response: 
defaultthe 
defaultincrease in the range of uncertainty in equilibrium climate sensitivity was appr
defaultoximately compensated for by a
default modest reduction in uncertaint
defaulty in 
defaultthe 
defaulttransient response. At the same time, the cumulative carbon budget demonstrates that, regardless of whethe
defaultr the response is at the high or low end of the current uncertainty range, emissions will eventually have to be reduced to zero if dangerous climate change is to be avoided. 
default&#xa0;
default20. 
defaultHence policies should focus on the development of technologies that would al
defaultlow rapid and substantial reductions in global emissions in the future, should they prove necessary
default. If this is
default at the expense of investment in short-term 
defaultemission reduction measures
default,
default which might ultimately prove 
defaultunnecessary
default if the response is at the low e
defaultnd of the current range
default, then so be it
default. 
default&#xa0;
default21. To put it bluntly, we 
defaultalready 
defaultknow the costs and externalities of wind power. 
defaultRapid deployment of wind power in the UK and Germany
default 
defaulttoday will therefore 
defaultmake 
defaultrelatively little difference 
defaultto the opt
defaultions we have a
defaultvailable for dealing with climate change on a global scale in the 2030s. 
defaultWe have much less idea about the relative merits of different CO2 geological storage options, which will take decades to evaluate. If temperatures reach 1.5 degrees and global emissio
defaultns are proving impossible to reduce through substitution measures, we are likely to need the option of deploying CCS on a very large-scale. The way things are going, we won’t have it, because we are 
defaultpouring subsidies into
default windmills instead. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat relevanc
defaulte do the IPCC’s conclusions have in respect of the review of the fourth Carbon Budget?
default&#xa0;
default22
default. 
defaultReiterating the points made above, i
defaultt is imperative that the Carbon Budget review should take into account the need to limit the overall stock of global carbon emis
defaultsions in setting 
defaulttechnology 
defaultpriorities.
default An exclusive focus on 
defaultreducing 
defaultthe flow of 
defaultemissions 
defaultin the short 
defaultto medium 
defaultterm has become counterproductive.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default