&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Carbon Tracker (IPC0038)defaultThe 
defaultUN 
defaultI
defaultntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 5
defaultth
default Assessment Report supported the use of global carbon budgets
default,
default amid
defaultst
default a level of
default consensus 
defaultfrom the global scientific community that is stronger 
defaultthan ever 
defaultthat 
defaultglobal warming is exacerbated by man-made emissi
defaultons.
default&#xa0;defaultAbout Carbon TrackerdefaultCarbon Tracker is a non-profit organisation working to align the capital markets with the climate change policy agenda. We are applying our thinking on carbon budgets and stranded assets across geographies and asset classes to in
defaultform investor thinking and the regulation of capital markets. We are funded by a number of US 
defaultand UK charitable foundations. 
defaultIntroductiondefaultCarbon Tracker welcomes the Energy and Climate Change Committee’s call for a discussion around the UN Intergovernment
defaultal Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) latest report as it provides an opportunity to ensure the weight of it
defaults findings are not understated. 
defaultCarbon Tracker’s research hypothesises a systemic risk sitting on the world’s capital markets due to the mismatch bet
defaultween climate change policy and the business models of listed coal, oil and gas companies. This has been illustrated by adopting a carbon budget approach – a comparison between the amount of carbon dioxide (CO
default2
default) emissions we can emit to have a good chance t
defaulto limit global warming to the internationally agreed level of 2°C – the carbon budget – and the embedded CO
default2
default sitting in the coal, oil and gas reserves owned by fossil fuel companies. 
defaultWe conclude that between 60 and 80% of reserves must stay in the ground a
defaultnd are ‘unburnable’.
default This has been supported by the IEA’s analysis that at least two thirds of the world’s fossil fuel reserves cannot be burnt unmitigated to have a 50% chance of achieving the 2°C target.
defaultThe IPCC’s latest research marks a significant 
defaultevent for this way of thinking about future climate change because of the inclusion of a carbon budget anal
defaultysis. Their findings are consistent with those 
defaultof Carbon Tracker’s research. The support of the scientific community behind the ‘unburnable carbon’ t
defaulthesis and the risks associated 
defaultwith the incorrect valuation of fossil fuel reserves that
default ca
defaultn
default not be burnt, provides a significant reminder of the actions that need to be taken to transition to a low-carbon economy in a financially stable manner.
default For invest
defaultors and governments this also raises questions around where funds are spent going forward.
defaultDo the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change? defaultLooking at the 
defaulteconomics of acting on climate change was not the remit of the Physical Science Basis report, but more t
defaulthe report being produced by the IPCC Working Group III 
defaultset for release in April 2014 
defaultwhich 
defaultwill look specifically at 
defaultthe costs and benefits of different
default climate change mitigation 
defaultoptions. 
defaultHowever, 
defaultthe Physical Science Basis report reveals t
defaulthe 
defaultdisparity between our current pathway and that of a safe level of climate change. This gives an indication of the level of ‘effort’ required to close the gap, from w
defaulthich you can get a sense of economic cost. 
defaultWe see the conclusions of the IPCC’s Working Group I (WGI) AR5 report to strengthen the case for action to prevent dangerous climate change, i
defaultn spite of its prediction for a lower level of climate sensitivity tha
defaultn their AR4 report.
defaultIn the AR5 report the IPCC lowered its estimate of transient climate response to carbon emissions (TCRE) – climate sensitivity – from their 2007 report by 25%. While this translates into a reduction in the rate of warming, emissions are
default currently rising approximately 1.9% each year, meaning any resulting benefit that a lower sensitivity is more than balanced out by rising emissions. The authors indicate this by stating that ‘if the same level of effort required in 2010 to limit carbon di
defaultoxide-induced warming to two degrees were applied starting in 2015, the resultant peak warming would be 10% higher, at 2.2°C’.
default In other words, the longer we delay emissions cuts, the faster those cuts will have to be to stay within the 2
default°
defaultC budget. In 
defaultturn, the faster the cuts have to be, the harder and more costly they are, echoing the sentiments introduced by the Stern Review in 2006.
default 
defaultThe issue of uncertainty around climate sensitivity has meant some have called for hesitancy before we commit economi
defaultc resources to act. However, as Martin Wolf, chief economics commentator at the Financial Times, wrote at the end of November, we should do exactly the opposite. 
default‘[Climate] sceptics argue as if uncertainty means that the right thing to do is nothing. On a
default foggy road, the number and speed of other cars is particularly uncertain. But this very ignorance makes cautious driving essential. The same applied to climate. Given the uncertainties about the climate system, the wisest course is surely to drive cautiou
defaultsly.’
defaultAs such, the IPCC’s most recent findings certainly strengthen the economic case for action.
default 
defaultThe speed at which this action happens is equivalent to the ‘choice between stranding those [fossil fuel] assets or stranding the planet’, as stated by the O
defaultECD Secretary-General, Angel Gurria.
defaultWhat implications do the IPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy making both nationally and internationally? defaultPerhaps the most vocal proponent of the carbon budget approach advocated
default by the IPCC is Lord Stern, the former World Bank chief economist and author of the landmark study of the economics of global warming, who says ‘If we continue to increase annual emissions, the budget will be depleted even sooner. I think nations, cities, 
defaultcommunities and companies will recognise the important of these findings and will increase the urgency and scale of the emissions reduction that they are planning to undertake.’
default  
defaultThis sentiment has been backed by a number of individuals including Richard
default Klein, a scientist with the Stockholm Environment Institute and an IPCC author, who says ‘the potential for increased transparency and accountability that the carbon budget affords may spur some countries to take a second look at their pledges, and encour
defaultage others to do the same’
default; Tim Yeo, a Conservative MP believes ‘the publication of a carbon budget by the IPCC increases the urgency and importance of the UN process and future COP meetings. Work should start at once on the establishment of a fair apport
defaultionment of emissions country by country’.
defaultThis final point
default provides a potentially crucial stumbling block for the influence of the IPCC’s carbon budget in policymaking. Discussion around equity between developed and developing nations, and what weighting 
defaultshould be attributed to historical or present emissions, is already the key area of disagreement in international negotiations. Some see attempting to apportion a carbon budget to each emitter as complicating this process further. Christiana Figueres, exec
defaultutive director of the UNFCCC said in the run up to the recent COP19 in Warsaw, ‘
defaultI don’t think it is possible [to allocate carbon budgets]. Politically it would be very difficult. I don’t know who would hold the pen.’
defaultThe UK Government has a leading position in that it has adopted carbon budgets which outline a pathway to achieving emissions reductions, as agreed in the Climate Change Act. There is a continuing challenge for those budgets to be translated into other pol
defaulticy measures. 
defaultDelivering the emissions cuts will require an energy transition, which will in turn need financing. This means that investment in the necessary infrastructure must be incentivised by government intervention or the market frameworks that direc
defaultt capital. 
defaultIt is clear that continuing reliance on fossil fuels is not compatible with achieving the carbon budgets. It is therefore contradictory to continue subsidies for fossil fuel based energy. For example tax-breaks and subsidies which promote the m
defaultature industry of hydrocarbon extraction are not consistent with the treatment being applied to renewables, where subsidies are tapered off as the costs of the new technologies comes down over time, (eg solar feed-in tariffs). The UK
default’s oil and gas producti
defaulton
default is not large enough to influence global commodity prices of oil and gas. Therefore there is no benefit for consumers of subsidising UK exploration and production, as it wil
defaultl not bring down energy bills. 
defaultThe current financial system is also not compatib
defaultle with achieving climate change targets.
default It has been well documented that short-termism, models which are based on historical performance, and rise of passive investing tracking the market leaves most institutional investors holding the incumbents, rather
default than driving the energy transition. Some efforts are underway to package 
defaultclean energy in suitable investment vehicles such as green bonds, and to provide funding through the Green Investment Bank. However
default,
default the other side of the equation is not being addre
defaultssed. The risks and uncertainty which surround the future of fossil fuels are not being reflected by the market, as it 
defaultcontinues to assume that emissions will rise and revenues will continue to flow as demand and prices are not affected. The financial syst
defaultem needs to stress test itself against different emissions scenarios, as well as using economic variables.
defaultThe Climate Change Act also gives powers covering adaptation reporting. We believe it would be timely to have reports on how the energy 
defaultsystem
default and th
defaulte financial
default regulator
default is adapting to 
defaultdelivering the carbon budget.
default This is not just how they are adapting to the impacts of climate change, but also to the changes required to mitigate climate change.
defaultWhat relevance do the IPCC’s conclusions have in respedefaultct of the review of the fourth Carbon Budget?defaultWhile a review of the carbon budget does not mean a change will be made, it is clearly a possibility. Consequently, it is worth noting that in theory it can only be altered if there have been significant change in the circumstances on which the budget was 
defaultset, demonstrated by evidence and analysis. 
defaultThe Committee on Climate Change have advised that there have been no significant changes in climate science or international efforts to cut emissions that could warrant a weakening of the carbon budget.
defaultWith the
default findings of the latest IPCC report, t
defaulthis is not in doubt. In f
defaultact, 
defaultthe IPCC’s conclusions 
defaultcould help force a strengthening of the fourth carbon budget given 
defaultin many respects, 
defaultthey 
defaultare their starkest yet
default. 
default 
defaultThe AR5 report concluded that global warming is ‘u
defaultnequivocal’, 
defaultis at least 95% sure that this trend is caused by human activity and temperatures 
defaultcould reach 4.8°C 
defaulthigher than 1990 levels 
defaultby 2100 
defaultif global emissions continue on their current trajectory. These findings are likely to be influential in policy
defaultmaking at all levels. Therefore, any weakening of carbon budget restrictions in the UK would diverge from much ambition at EU a
defaultnd international level, exacerbating the system-level shock which would be necessary at a later date. 
defaultTranslating the carbon bud
defaultget into the UK’s energy and financial systems will place the UK in a leadership position, as it will already be adapting to a low carbon future and be able to maximise its opportunities. The alternative is that the UK will be left with infrastructure whic
defaulth is 
defaultincompatible 
defaultw
defaultith o
defaultur legislated climate targets, which will become stranded assets and represent a waste of capital for taxpayers and investors.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.carbontracker.org/wastedcapital
default 
default 
defaulthttp://w
defaultww.climatechange2013.org/images/uploads/WGI_AR5_SPM_brochure.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cd519de0-55e1-11e3-96f5-00144feabdc0.html?si
defaultteedition=uk#axzz2lmUa4Tkf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.oecd.org/about/secretary-general/the-climate-challenge-achieving-zero-emissions.htm
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/29/carbon-budget-talks-urgent-ipcc-lord-stern
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.irinnews.org/report/98891/will-the-climate-change-in-warsaw
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/29/
defaultcarbon-budget-talks-urgent-ipcc-lord-stern
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/24/ipcc-carbon-budget-warsaw-clima
defaultte-change-christiana-figueres
default 
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/policies/adapting-to-climate-change
default 
defaulthttp://www.theccc.org.uk/pressreleases/committee-on-climate-change-assessment-of
default-science-and-international-circumstances-reinforces-existing-fourth-carbon-budget/
default 
default