&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Marcel defaultCrokdefault (IPC0041)default&#xa0;
defaultI am a Dutch freelance science writer based in Amsterdam. Since 2005 I specialised in the global warming debate. 
defaultIn 2005 as an editor of the Dutch monthly popular science magazine 
defaultNatuurwetenschap
default 
default&amp;
default 
defaultTechniek
default (recently this has become the Dutch edition of 
defaultNew Scientist
default) I published a long and critical article about the infamous hockey stick graph featuring the critici
defaultsm of Stephen McIntyre and Ross McKitrick. Many of the issues described in that article came back in the Climategate emails. 
defaultI published a critical book in 2010 that focused on the third and fourth assessment reports of the IPCC (TAR and AR4). The Dutch M
defaultinistry of Infrastructure and the Environment 
defaultthen gave me funding to critically review AR5 as an expert reviewer.
defaultSince 
defaultC
defaultlimategate I am in favour of a more constructive interaction between climate scientists with opposing views. Late 2012 the Ministry of
default Infrastructure and the Environment funded an international discussion platform, ClimateDialogue.org, that organises constructive dialogues between climate scientists with opposing views. This has been set up by the leading Dutch climate related institutes
default KNMI and PBL and myself
default.
default We cover controversial topics and invite scientists with a range of views.
defaultIn 2013 I was co-author of my first peer reviewed paper (describing a European temperature shift in 1988).
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultHow robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report? 
defaultT
defaulto answer this question is beyond the scope of this inquiry I would say. However your own introduction provides a good start to deal with it. 
defaultYou wrote: 
default“
defaultThe report concluded that, ‘
defaultit is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20th century.’ But it reduced the lower bound for likely climate sensitivity and for the first time did not publish a best estimate of it because 
defaultof lack of agreement
default.”
defaultIt’s good that you picked up this apparent paradox. AR5 itself focused on the 95% certainty that humans are the cause of most (&gt;50%) of the warming since 1950. Most media outlets brought this as the major news of AR5 writing things l
defaultike ‘how much more certainty do you want
default (before you act)
default?’. 
defaultHowever this interpretation of the 95% claim is misleading. In a sense the 95% claim of AR5 (itself a result of expert judgment and not some sort of mathematical calculation)
default is a no-brainer. 
defaultTo understand this we focus on this other important parameter, climate sensitivity (the rise in global temperature after a doubling of the CO2 concentration). Recently several papers have been published estimating climate sensitivity from observational dat
defaulta since 1850. These studies assume that almost 
defaultall of the warming since 1850
default is due to greenhouse gases. These papers then come up 
defaultwith best estimates for climate sensitivity in the range of 1.5 to 2.0
default°C, considerably lower than the best estimate of 3
default.0
default°C 
defaultthat IPCC has presented in all their assessment reports so far.
defaultSo claiming that at least 50% of the warming since 1950 is due to humans is meaningless. The much 
defaultmore important question is whether the contribution of greenhouse gases to warming is big or small. AR5 has all the ingredients to conclude that the contribution is much smaller than we have thought for the last three decades. But by not giving a best esti
defaultmate for climate sensitivity it failed to communicate this important message. 
defaultSo IPCC failed to give policy makers its most important conclusion. And IPCC only dealt with this important decision in a footnote in the 
defaultSummary for Policymakers (
defaultSPM
default)
default. 
defaultThe 95%
default claim also tells you nothing about the seriousness of the climate issue. The 95% can be completely in accordance with there being no climate problem at all. IPCC failed to explain this clearly and journalists didn’t pick it up.
defaultTo conclu
defaultde: the 95% cl
defaultaim 
defaultof AR5 has been misinterpreted by most people, including policy makers and the media
default as the final proof that we have a huge anthropogenic climate problem. The claim itself proves no such thing and is in fact pretty meaningless.
defaultAlthough it seems contradict
defaultory, there is in itself no conflict between the increasing certainty (the 95% attribution claim) and not giving a best estimate for climate sensitivity (less certainty). The 95% claim is just very conservative and tells you little about the seriousness of 
defaultthe climate issue.
default&#xa0;
defaultHave the IPCC adequately addresses criticisms of previous reports? 
defaultThere is some encouraging progress in this area. For example in AR4 IPCC claimed greenhouse gases already influenced hurricanes. This was based on a very biased selecti
defaulton of the literature. Both in the 2011 IPCC SREX report and in AR5 IPCC does a much better job, admitting there is no link (yet) between all kinds of extreme weather events (hurricanes, floods, droughts) and the increase in greenhouse gas concentration.
defaultHowever there are other topics where IPCC seems to be completely unwilling to address criticism
defaults
default. A notorious example is the case of long term persistence (LTP). Most people will agree that the weather of this hour 
defaultis related to that of the next. Well the 
defaultsame can be said about climate. If this year we’re in an ice age, logically next year we are still in an ice age. This is called persistence. LTP becomes relevant when you want to claim that the recent rise in global temperature of 0.8
default°C is statistically s
defaultignificant. 
defaultThis is important for what IPCC calls ‘detection’. You first have to detect a ‘significant’ increase in the global temperature, before you can ‘attribute’ it to any cause.
defaultTo do this calculation you have to assume what kind of statistical model
default best fits your data. IPCC and the whole climate field for some reason has adopted the view that one can describe climate time series with a so-called AR1 model. This model assumes that this years’ climate will influence that of next year but not the year 
defaultafter. This AR1 model is also called short term persistence. There are many papers criticising this approach however both in AR4 and now again in AR5 IPCC failed to address this issue in a satisfactory way.
defaultIn my review of AR5 I wrote: 
default“
defaultIt is commendable 
defaultthat the authors mention Cohn and Lins, 2005
default. Unfortunately this is the only place in the entire report where this important paper is mentioned. In their conclusions 
defaultCohn and Lins write: “[With respect to] temperature data, there is overwhelming evidence 
defaultthat the planet has warmed during the past century. But could this warming be due to natural dynamics? Given what we know about the complexity, long-term persistence and non-linearity of the climate system, it seems the answer might be yes…natural climatic
default excursions may be much larger than we imagine.” AR4 did not do a good job dealing with this topic, as is explained in McKitricks submission to the IAC: http://www.rossmckitrick.com/uploads/4/8/0/8/4808045/iac.ross_mckitrick.pdf (page 7-9) He mentions an 
default[
defaultClimategate] 
defaultemail of 
default[David] 
defaultParker to 
default[Phil] 
defaultJones, who were responsible for the AR4 treatment of the Cohn and Lins paper. Parker wrote: "Maybe the biggest problem is Ross McKitrick and David Stephenson’s remarks on trends; we used only an AR-1 and they 
defaultmay be correct in advocating a more complex model. Our software for restricted maximum likelihood does not cope with ARMA(1,1) and may have to get John Kennedy to investigate new software using the cited references. This may be a big job but could be done 
defaultafter the LA3 meeting if we agree there what to do. Alternatively – as we have considered already – we could consider not citing linear trends, just overall changes of level from the smooth curves. This would save some space." In the end Parker and Jones d
defaultid cite linear trends in chapter 3 claiming the warming was highly significant. In the second draft of AR4 IPCC wrote: "Determining the statistical significance of a trend line in geophysical data is difficult, and many oversimplified techniques will tend 
defaultto overstate the significance. Zheng and Basher (1999), Cohn and Lins (2005) and others have used time series methods to show that failure to properly treat the pervasive forms of long-term persistence and autocorrelation in trend residuals can make errone
defaultous detection of trends a typical outcome in climatic data analysis." This was a fair comment about Cohn and Lins. However after the second draft this text was removed and in appendix 3.a a much more disputatious text was introduced: "Nevertheless, the res
defaultults depend on the statistical model used, and more complex models are not as transparent and often lack physical realism. Indeed, long-term persistence models (Cohn and Lins, 2005) have not been shown to provide a better fit to the data than simpler model
defaults." This was a completely ad hoc remark without any reference to the literature. A fair treatment of this topic in AR5 is much needed. I think this discussion should be dealt with in both Ch 2 and 10.
default”
default&#xa0;
defaultRoss McKitrick also raised the issue of LTP again in 
defaulthis AR5 review comments. Did AR5 address this issue? No. Doug Keenan, a British mathematician who has shown interest in this topic, explained in detail that AR5 didn’t give LTP a fair treatment.
defaultKeenan’s research has recently led to many parliamentary ques
defaulttions by Lord Donoughue.
defaultSo several people raised this important issue both during the AR4 and AR5 review process. Privately Parker and Jones admitted the comments of McKitrick were valid. However in the end IPCC more or less ignored the issue both in AR4
default and AR5. It hasn’t even started to take the topic serious.
defaultIn May of this year we organised a Climate Dialogueabout LTP inviting Armin Bunde, Demetris
default 
defaultKoutsoyiannis and Rasmus
default 
defaultBenestad as participants.
default 
defaultBunde and Koutsoyiannis
default have 
defaultboth published 
defaultmany pap
defaulters about LTP and both are convinced that when you use an AR1 model the statistical significance of the 0.8
default°C is seriously overestimated. 
defaultBut 
defaultthis is what IPCC 
defaultstill 
defaultdoes. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultHow much scope is there to question of the report’s conclusions?
defaultNot enough. In 
defaultgeneral critics of the IPCC view (sceptics if you like) are not invited to participate in the writing process, as coordinating lead authors
default, lead authors
default or even contributing authors. So they can only contribute as expert reviewer
defaults
default. In practice an expert r
defaulteviewer has 
defaultvery little
default influence. Just look again at the example of LTP given above. Several reviewers both during the AR4 and AR5 review process mentioned this important issue. In the end though it was ignored. The same can be said about Nic Lewis’ impor
defaulttant review comment to 
defaultpresent two ranges for 
defaultclimate sensitivity
default, one based on climate models and one based on observations.
default&#xa0;
defaultCan any of the areas of the science now be considered settled as a result of AR5’s publication, if so which?
defaultUnfortunately very f
defaultew things are settled in the global warming debate. There is only one solid fact: the greenhouse gas concentration
defaults are
default rising and humans are causing this increase. A second fact is that the climate is warmer than a century ago. How much warmer exactly is 
defaultstill a matter of debate. And how much of the warming is attributable to humans is also far from settled.
default&#xa0;
defaultDoes the AR5 address the reliability of climate models?
defaultS
defaulteveral chapters deal with the reliability of climate models and one chapter (9) in specific
default terms
default. 
defaultClimate models play a huge role in the report. All the future projections of climate in 2100 are based on these models. The reliability of the models is therefore crucial. Unfortunately,
default 
defaultthe implicit conclusion in AR5 that climate models are, overa
defaultll, sufficiently reliable for projecting global warming is not supported by the evidence
default.
defaultI
defaultt has become increasingly clear that models don’t fit the observations very well, even when you look at the global average
default temperature
default. Stephen McIntyre showed in a 
defaultblog post
default that models on average show 50% more warming during the last 35 years than the real climate:
default&#xa0;
defaultModelled versus observed decadal global surface temperature trend 1979–2013defaultTemperature trends in 
default°
defaultC/decade. Virtually all model climates warmed much faster than the real climate over the last 35 years. Source: 
defaulthttp://climateaudit.org/2013/09/24/two-minutes-to-midnight/
default. Models 
defaultwith multiple runs have separate boxplots; models with single runs are grouped together in the boxplot marked ‘singleton’. The orange boxplot at the right combines all model runs together. The red dotted line shows the actual increase in global surface tem
defaultperature over the same period per the HadCRUT4 observational dataset.
default&#xa0;
defaultInstead of showing this insightful graph IPCC presented this
default (
defaultFigure 1 from 
defaultBox
default 9.2)
default:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultFrequency distribution of trends in global mean surface temperature from 114 CMIP5 model runsdefaultModel runs are grey bars for the periods 
default(a) 
default1998–2012
default,
default (
defaultb
default) 1984–1998
default,
default (
defaultc
default)1951–2012
default. The comparison is
default with the uncertainty range for the observed trend per the HadCRUT4 dataset (red, hatched) over the same periods
default.F
defaultrom IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, 
defaultBox
default 9.
default2
default, Figure 1.
defaultIn this figure the IPCC attempts to show that the recent hiatus is more to do with choosing the hot 
defaultEl Niño
default year 1998 as a starting point. Panel (a) shows that CMIP5 models overestimate the HadCrut4 global temperature trend since 1998. However in panel (b) one can see that models tend to underestimate the observations in the period 1984–1998. So the message is:
default if you look at short periods of 15 years the models are sometimes too hot and sometimes too cold. Panel (c) then suggests models are performing well on a longer timescale, in this case 60 years. 
defaultThat is not surprising, since models are likely to have been
default tuned so that they provide a reasonable match to the global surface temperature rise over the historical simulation period, most of which occurred after 1950
default. The discrepancy between models and observations over the last 35 years is conveniently not shown
default. This period is long enough to be relevant for climate.
defaultAnother important discrepancy between models and observations is laid down by Nic Lewis in another Climate Audit blog post.
default Here Lewis shows that the so-called Transient Climate Response (TCR), a mo
defaultre policy relevant parameter for climate sensitivity, in the models is considerably higher than the TCR that is based on the best observational evidence:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultTransient climate response distribution for CMIP5 models in AR5 Table 9.5defaultThe bar heights show how
default many models in Table 9.5 exhibit each level of TCR
default&#xa0;
defaultAgain, AR5 does not show a similar graph but gives this statement
default(Box 12.2):
default&#xa0;
default“
defaultthe ranges of TCR estimated from the observed warming and from AOGCMs agree well, increasing our confidence in the assessmen
defaultt of uncertainties in projections over the 21st century.
default”
default&#xa0;
defaultHow can this be right, when the average model TCR is 40% higher than an observationally-based best estimate of 
default1.3
default°
defaultC, and almost half the models have TCRs 50% or more above that? The IPCC obscured 
defaultthis large discrepancy between ‘models’ and ‘observations’ by not showing a graph like our Figure 7 and by a misleading statement in the full report.
defaultSo models overestimate the warming of the real climate in the last 35 years by 50%. And the same models ha
defaultve ECS and TCR values that are considerably higher than estimates based on observations indicate. Both these important observations were not made explicitly by the IPCC in AR5.
default&#xa0;
defaultHas AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus 
defaultin the global surface temperature record?
defaultStephen McIntyre showed in detail
default that
default the
default IPCC
default 
defaultdidn’t take the hiatus serious enough
default until too late in the AR5 process
default. 
defaultIn the first draft they ignored the issue. In the SOD they dealt reasonably well with the 
defaulthiatus, showing that models don’t simulate it. In the final draft AR5 then came up with a new graph that obscured the mismatch between models and observations. This graph almost certainly contains an error.
default Note that this final graph was never presented t
defaulto the expert reviewers. Is IPCC going to acknowledge this error and fix it?
default&#xa0;
defaultDo the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change?
defaultIt defini
defaulttely weakens the case for ac
defaulttion
default,
default although IPCC nowhere admits this. There is now good observational evidence for a substantially lower climate sensitivity. This means considerably less warming is to be expected in the future. Meanwhile it has become clear that extreme weather events
default (hurricanes, floods, droughts) have not become worse. This means that in the coming decades any climate money is best spent on adaptation, i.e. helping those regions vulnerable to extreme weather events to be better prepared for the next event that sooner
default or later will take place.
defaultThe case for mitigation is less urgent 
defaultand this means that as a society we could first focus on new technologies that make decarbonisation possible with lower costs than the now available options like wind, solar, biomass etc.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
defaulthttp://www.pbl.nl/en/news/newsitems/2012/pbl-knmi-and-crok-
defaultlaunch-climate-discussion-platform-climatedialogueorg
defaulthttp://rogerpielkejr.blogspot.nl/2013/10/coverage-of-extreme-events-in-ipcc-ar5.html
default Cohn T.A.,
default Lins H.F. (2005), “Nature’s style: naturally trendy”, Geophysical Research Letters, 32, L23402; doi:10.1029/2005GL024476
defaulthttp://www.informath.org/AR5stat.pdf
defaulthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201314/ldhansrd/text/131203w0001.htm#13120366000164
defaulthttp://www.climatedialogue.org/long-term-persistence-and-trend-significance/
defaulthttp://climateaudit.org/2013/09/24/two-minutes-to-midnight/
defaulthttp://climateaudit.org/2013/12/09/does-the-observational-evidence-in-ar5-support-itsthe-cmip5-models-tcr-ranges/
defaulthttp://climateaudit.org/2013/09/24/two-minutes-to-midnight/
default and 
defaulthttp://climateaudit.org/2013/09/30/ipcc-disappears-the-discrepancy/
defaulthttp://climateaudit.org/2013/09/30/ipcc-disappears-the-discrepancy/
default&#xa0;
default