&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Energy Technologies Institute (ETI) is
default a public-private partnership between global energy and engineering firms and the UK Government.
defaultWe carry out three key activities:
defaultOur mission is to 
defaultaccelerate the development, demonstration and eventual commercial
default d
defaulteployment
default of a focused portfolio of energy technologies which will increase energy efficiency, reduce greenhouse gas emissions and help achieve energy and climate change goals
defaultIn the last five years, the ETI has invested over £210m in 
default52 
defaultprojects across nine techno
defaultlogy programme areas
default.
default The technology project portfolio to 2017 
defaulttotals over
default £400m of investment with four key aims to reduce the costs of generating energy, demand reduction, increasing investor confidence and increasing public acceptance and engagement.
default 
defaultOur industry and government partnership means we can share risk and create affordability for the development and demonstration of 
defaultemerging 
defaultnew technologies
default that have the potential to make a material impact on the future UK energy system
default.
defaultAlthough the ETI i
defaults a stand
default-
defaultalone organisation
default, through our partnership operating model
default 
defaultwe are able to bring together the collective knowledge, expertise and experience of our diverse member 
defaultorganisations, the 
defaultproject partners
default that we collaborate with in delivering projects
default, and external stakeholders
default.
default This
default focused
default partnership
default model
default between the public and private sectors provides access to money, skills and market interests.
defaultPartnership and collaboration is key to the ETI and we 
defaulthave 
defaultwork
defaulted
default with 
defaultover 
default119 partner organisations
default 
defaultto date
default, including 29 universities and research institutes
default.
defaultOur strategic 
defaulttechno-economic 
defaultanalysis of the UK energy system provides insights, policy support and investment that 
defaultidentif
defaulties
default and prioritis
defaultes
default 
defaultthe UK’s future
default low carbon
default energy 
defaultsystem 
defaultdevelopmen
defaultt 
defaultrequirements
default.
default 
default 
defaultI
defaultt is also being used to identify credible, lowest-cost pathways to support 
defaultpolicy makers as they consider major 
defaultfuture infrastructure 
defaultdecisions. 
default 
defaultIn addition, 
defaultour projects build knowledge
default and capability that will 
defaulthelp 
defaultcontribute to the 
defaulteffective 
defaultdelivery of the UK’s low carbon future
default.
defaultRecognising the need to focus and target investments to ensure value for money and leverage from public sector investments, the ETI’s techno-economic 
defaultmodelling and 
defaultstrategic 
defaultanalysis of the UK energy system
default is a critical tool supporting effective innovation delivery.  The system is termed ‘ESME’ and is now used by DECC and the Committee on Climate Change to aid with planning and effective investment targeting.
defaultThe development
default priorities
default we have identified
default ar
defaulte:
defaultThese priorities are 
defaultclosely
default 
defaultaligned with the Government’s balance of focus between energy efficiency, renewable energy and other low carbon sources.
defaultHowever, it is important
default that the right steps are taken to ensure the cost of carbon reductions are affordable in the context of sustaining UK economic growth and industrial development.
default 
default Identifying and developing a series of options to support future energy system pathway decis
defaultions will be critical to delivering this. 
defaultThe ETI is
default 
defaulta core member of the Low Carbon Innovation Coordination Group (LCICG), which brings together the major public sector backed organisations that invest in low carbon innovation in the UK. 
default 
defaultThe LCICG’s aim is to enhance the focus, coordination and delivery of support for innovation in low carbon technologies.  
defaultAlthough each LCICG organisation has its own priorities for, and approach to, 
defaultspecific 
defaultinvestment
defaults
default in low carbon innovation, 
defaultthere is
default 
defaultstrong alignment in terms of 
defaultthe 
defaultdesired outcomes
default and the emphasis on co-ordinated and targeted innovation investment across all parts of the
default energy
default innovation landscape
default. 
default 
defaultThis is expressed in the shared LCICG aim, which is to maximise the impact of UK pub
defaultlic sector funding for low carbon technologies, in order to:
defaultThe 
defaultT
defaultechnology Innovation Needs Assessment (TINA) 
defaultpr
defaultoject
default ha
defaults
default provided 
defaultfocus for LCICG innovation funding prioritisation
default,
default whilst recognising the differing rol
defaultes and remits of LCICG members. 
defaultThe ETI’s ESME modelling toolset was used widely in development of the various TINAs.
defaultA well-coordinated funding lands
defaultcape also increases the UK’s attractiveness to inward investment.
defaultLow carbon technologies often take 
defaulta long time
default to successfully develop, and even then significant improvements in their performance and cost can still be achieved by feeding back 
defaultlearning 
defaulton
default an ongoing basis 
defaultto improve 
defaultcomponent and system-level design
default.
default 
default It is therefore important that the support 
defaultlow carbon 
defaulttechnologies receive is 
defaulttargeted and 
defaultsustained over the long term. 
default 
defaultLCICG members are working to improve the technology journey for developers and investors, making sure the right support is available at the right time and at the right scale to deliver a seamless progression, and to ensure that the balance of support is ap
defaultpropriate between 
defaultthe 
defaultdifferent stages
default of the innovation chain
default.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default              
defaultPage 
default3
default of 
default3
default