&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by James Painterdefault (IPC0044)default1. The Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism (RISJ) is part of the Department of Politics and International Relations at the University of Oxford.  It was established in 2006. The RISJ aims to serve as a leading forum for a productive engagement be
defaulttween scholars from a wide range of disciplines and the practitioners of journalism.  It aims to bring the depth of academic scholarship to major issues of relevance to the practice of the news media. 
default2. The RISJ regularly publishes reports and books on v
defaultarious issues affecting the media.  On the specific issue of climate change, 
defaultJames Painter 
defaulthas published three recent works:  
defaultSummoned by Science: Reporting Climate Change at Copenhagen and Beyond
default (2010); 
defaultPoles Apart: the international reporting of climate
default scepticism 
default(2011); and 
defaultClimate Change in the Media:
default&#xa0;
defaultreporting
default&#xa0;
defaultrisk and uncertainty
default (September 2013).
default&#xa0;
default 
default3
default. This submission 
defaultdraws on the research contained in 
defaultClimate Change in the Media
default, which includes 
defaultdetailed 
defaultdiscussion of the way the last round of IPCC reports in 2007 were reported 
defaultaround the world
default.  It focuses on the way uncertainty and risk were conveyed in around 350 articles in the print media in 18 newspapers in six countries, including the UK, with a com
defaultbined readership of 15 million.  The book also includes a lengthy discussion of the different types of uncertainties surrounding climate change, and the possible advantages of framing the issue as one of risk management.
default4. In October 2013, the RISJ also p
defaultublished another study on risk and uncertainty reporting in climate change and other sectors like health, which summarised what we know about the particular challenges of communicatin
defaultg such difficult issues for the general public.
default (Ashe
default,
default October 2013)
default  Thi
defaults publication drew on a conference held the previous year on the same topic which drew together academics, scientists and practitioners from different fields. 
default5default. The committee asks: defaultHow effective is AR5 and the summary for policymakers in conveyingdefault&#xa0;defaultwhat idefaults meant by uncertainty in scientific terms? Would a focus on risk rather than uncertainty be useful?default6. 
defaultThe first point to make is 
defaultthat the 
defaultWorking Group-1 (
defaultWG-1
default) 
defaultreport of 
defaultthe Fifth Assessment Report (
defaultAR5
default)
default 
defaultexplicitly 
defaultcontained a large number of uncertaint
defaulties 
defaultabout climate change 
defaultin its Summary for Policy M
defaultakers (SPM).  The draft version contained 
defaultthe word 
default‘
defaultuncertain
defaultty’
default or 
default‘
defaultuncertaint
defaulties’
default 
default42 times in just 31 pages
default, although this was reduced to 
default36
default by the time the final
default, shorter
default version was issued. (Doyle
default, 
defaultSeptember 
default2013
default)
default7.  
defaultLaying out these uncertainties is the appropriate task of such a report and reflects the way 
defaultthe way climate science is conducted
default.  But 
defaultthere are several problems when communicating 
defaultsuch 
defaultscientific uncertainties to a wider audience, whe
defaultther they are policy makers, the media, or the wider public. 
default More resources, training and 
defaultanalysis need 
defaultto 
defaultbe directed at 
defaultthinking through 
defaultand implementing 
defaulteffective communication a
defaultbout uncertainty 
defaultby climate scientists and other bodies.  
defaultOne key obstacle
default remains that the IPCC still only employs two professional communicators. 
default8.  
defaultIf by ‘effective’ 
defaultin the question 
defaultwe mean ‘improving understanding’, then there is substantial evidenc
defaulte that scientific uncertainty can be
default a difficult concept to grasp. 
default It is o
defaultften misunderstood by 
defaultthe general public who can 
defaultinterpret it to 
defaultimply complete, rather than relative, lack of knowledge
default – or in other words, ignorance
default.
default   
defaultMany fail to make the distinction between 
defaultwhat some call 
default‘school science’, which 
defaultis 
defaulta
default source of solid
default facts and reliable understanding
default, and ‘research science’ where uncertainty is engrained and is often the impetus for further investigation. 
default (Painter, 2013)
default9.  Research carried out both in the USA and the UK suggests that messages of uncertainty too can 
defaultbe an obstacle to
default public engagement
default.
default  
defaultIf scientists constantly talk about uncertainty, often the response of the listener is not necessarily apathy but lapsing into an unhappy situation of not knowing how to proceed, and therefore discounting or dodging th
defaulte problem.  Or some can even get angry when scientists don’t know things.  (Shuckburgh 
defaultet al, 
default2012)
default10.  The way the IPCC reports present uncertainties using ranges of probabilities and assigning confidence levels has also been shown to be problematic.  It
default is highly laudable that the scientists are attempting to quantify the uncertainties
default to help decision making
default, but there may well be a mismatch with public understanding unless these concepts are clearly explained.
default11. For example, research in the USA 
defaultabout
default the communication of the 2007 IPCC reports strongly suggests that there can be a 
defaultbig discrep
default&#xad;
defaultancy between the meaning the IPCC intended, and the con
default&#xad;
defaultclu
default&#xad;
defaultsion people actu
default&#xad;
defaultally drew.  In particular, they found that 
defaultthe public consistently misinterpret the IPCC’s probabilistic statements, and usually in a ‘regressive’ way, or in other words, less extreme than intended 
defaultby 
defaultthe authors of the reports.  So for example, when the I
defaultPCC writes that ‘many changes in the global
default climate system during the 21
defaultst
default century &lt;…&gt; would 
defaultvery likely
default be larger than those observed during the 20
defaultth
default century’, the IPCC intends this to mean more than 90% probability, whereas the typical respondent interpreted this to mean a 65-75% probability. 
default(Bu
defaultdescu et al, 2009)
default12. Other criticisms of the IPCC’s portrayal of uncertainties are that it is too complicated; 
defaulttoo 
defaultconfusing (because the intervals overlap); links numbers to words 
defaultwhich can also be an impediment to understanding
default; and ignores affect (how
default people feel about what they are reading).
default  (Ashe 2013, quoting Professor Chris Rapley)
default1
default3
default.  It is not clear that even the expression ‘it is 95 per cent certain that humans are mostly to blame for temperatures that h
defaultave climbed since 1951’ is well 
defaultundersto
defaultod.  In the context of this statement, one IPCC author was asked on the BBC by the presenter 
defaulton the day of the release of WG-1 ‘
defaultwhat the other 5 per cent of scientists believed
default?’
default.  In other words, there was a confusion between what the authors of the
default WG-1
default 
defaultreport collectively had concluded 
defaultwas true 
defaultwith a very high degree of certainty and what percentage of scientists were in agreement with the statement. 
default14. More explanation 
defaultis 
defaultneeded about what the phrase ’95 per cent
default certain
default’ means
default.   Few people may know
default that such an expression in the scientific world is often taken as a gold standard for ‘certainty’ and can be likened to the degree of confidence scientists have in decades’ worth of evidence that cigarettes are deadly.  (Borenstein, September 2013)
default15
default.  A
defaultnother 
defaultproblem with 
defaulthighlighting the scientific uncertainties
default is that 
defaultsome j
defaultournalists 
defaultor writers of opinion pieces in the media 
defaultreport the uncertainties extensively
default, or misreport them, in order to cast doubt on the science
default, the IPCC
default or the implications of it.  S
defaultome media organisations may play 
defaultthem up to follow an editorial line of justifying not taking action on curbing greenhouse gas emissions. 
default&#xa0;
default16
default.  
defaultThe RISJ 
defaultstudy of the way the 2007 IPCC reports were reported in the print media 
defaultaround the world showed that the media were not very good at explaining how the IPCC measured uncertainty. About 40 per cent of the articles included the IPCC concepts of likelihood and confidence levels but only 15 per cent included an explanation of what
default they actually meant 
default&#xa0;
default- such as 'very likely' meaning more than a 90 per cent probability. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default(We are in the process of studying the 2013 
defaultIPCC 
defaultreport, so we cannot tell yet how widely these concepts were reported this time around).
default17
default. 
defaultJournalists 
defaultinterview
defaulted for the study 
defaultgave lots of good reasons to explain this - such as readers or viewers not liking or understanding numbers - or the difficulties of concepts such as 'medium confidence'. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSome of them agreed that 
defaultone of the essential challenges remains to 
defaultexplain to a g
defaulteneral public that uncertainty (i
defaultn a scientific context
default)
default does not mean ignorance, and uncertainty can be quantified, particularly to help decision-making.
default&#xa0;
default18
default.  
defaultThere is a growing body of literature suggesting that risk language may be a good, or at least a less bad, way of communicating climate change to 
defaultpolicy makers and 
defaultthe general public.   Many argue that when compared to the messages of disaster or uncertain
defaultty that often surround climate change, 
defaultrisk is far from being a panacea, but it does offer a more sophisticated and apposite language to have the discussion in and a more helpful prism through which to analyse the problem.  
default1
default9
default. One of the arguments in fav
defaultour of using risk language is that for policy makers, it shifts the debate away from what would count as conclusive proof or overwhelming certainty before taking action, towards an analysis of the comparative costs and risks of different policy options (in
defaultcluding doing nothing).  
default20
default. 
defaultAnother is that risk is an essential part of everyday experience, including the worlds of insurance, health and investment.   Many people have to deal with it daily and manage it in different ways: most people in the developed
default world take out house insurance against the low-probability, very high-impact event of a fire.  Patients 
defaultare increasingly familiar with the concept of the risks and benefits of different health treatments
default (
defaultthough they rely on trusted intermediaries to help
default them 
defaultto 
defaultnavigate the risk
default)
default.
default&#xa0;
default 
default 
defaultInvestors constantly use the language of risk, and one top UK banker at HSBC reacted to the 
defaultWG-1 report
default by describing climate change as 
defaultessentially 
defaultan ‘issue of strategic risk management’.  
defaultAnd s
defaultome of the risk assessments people make are on the same timescale as possible climate impacts – for example, taking out a pension policy into which they pay for 40 years. 
default21.  It is certainly the case that risk language is 
defaultnow 
defaultoften 
defaultbeing 
defaultused by politici
defaultans and other science communicators.  By risk language, we mean such 
defaultevery day phrases 
default'taking out an insurance policy',
default 
default‘
defaultloading the dice'
default 
defaultor 'playing Russian roulette with the climate'. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDavid Cameron, Michael Bloomberg and Lord Nick Ste
defaultr
defaultn have all recen
defaulttly used such language as a helpful way of describing the problem and the need to take action. 
default Lord Ste
defaultr
defaultn for example 
defaultargues that sceptics have to 
defaultshow 
defaultthey have high confidence the planet is going to experience only the lower end of possible temperature 
defaultincreases for them to make their case that it is not necessary to take action to minimise climate risks.
default22. 
defaultRisk concepts in a narrow sense of assigning probability levels to adverse consequences are important for 
defaulta 
defaultbetter understanding
default of climate science
default.   For example, c
defaultlimate models can now evaluate how much man-made climate change may have made an extreme weather event like a severe flood 
defaultor drought 
defaultmore likely.  Such risk assessments usually include probability levels, and what degree of confidence sc
defaultientists have in their findings.   
default23.  However, even though 
defaultrisk 
defaultlanguage 
defaultand concepts 
defaultshould be 
defaultgenerally 
defaultwelcomed, a number of caveats should be made.  
defaultFirst, some metaphors work better than others, and need to be constantly tested.  ‘Loading the dice
default’ for example, has been shown to work well in the USA, but not so well in the UK where the practice of playing dice is not so widespread.  (Shuckburgh
default et al
default, 2012)
defaultSecondly, there is little research done with focus groups on how 
defaultthey react to risk language and concepts about climate change, in terms of understanding, engagement and behaviour change.  
defaultIntuitively 
defaultmany observers may 
defaultfeel that risk language 
defaultw
defaultould work with a wider audience, who are accustomed to risk from the worlds 
defaultof insurance, betting, health and investment. However, there's a need to test this more. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMoreover, many people may find the numerical assignment of probabilities to possible risks difficult to understand or use as a basis for action. 
defaultThirdly, it 
defaultundersta
defaultndable that the authors of report on the physical science
default (WG-1) 
defaultsh
defaultied
default away from using risk language.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultThey argue that they prefer to use 
default‘
defaultlikelihoods
default’
default as it is a more neutral and quantifiable language; they say risk on the other hand is a more qualitative
default language and implies only bad outcomes whereas some outcomes from climate change may be beneficial to a limited extent.
default&#xa0;
default2
default4
default. 
defaultHowever, t
defaulthere is already evidence that 
defaultthe Working Group Two 
default(WG-2) 
defaultreport on climate impacts will probably have much more risk l
defaultanguage in it, as the IPCC 
default2012 
defaultreport on extreme weather events did. 
default&#xa0;
default(Doyle,
default November
default 2013) 
defaultThis is in part explained by the different science disciplines involved, but also by the greater acceptance that the impact of extreme weather events are likely t
defaulto be negative, and therefore 'risky' in the sense of a negative outcome.
default&#xa0;
default2
default5
default.  Finally, It is worth drawing 
defaultmore 
defaulton the literature and practical ex
defaultperience of climate scientists o
defaultn how to communicate the uncertainties effectively.  Many climate scientists 
defaultused to dealing with the media and policy makers stressed that they 
defaulthave 
defaultfound it helpful to start with what they were very sure about - for example, that temperatures are going up, that it's largely caused by human activity and that many of the impacts ar
defaulte likely to be negative - before explaining the areas of uncertainty. 
default&#xa0;
default2
default6
default.  There is also a lot of work being 
defaultdone in general in the media on the use of info
default-
defaultgraphics in expressing risk and uncertainty around climate science and other scientific issues. T
defaulthere are already some good examples of representing risk and uncertainty
default 
default- and much more could be done. In many cases, visual presentations of uncertainty can be better than text for 
defaulteffective communication and 
defaultpublic understanding. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2
default7
default. References: 
defaultAsh
defaulte, Teresa. ‘How the Media Report Scientific Risk and Uncertainty: A review of the Literature’.  RISJ, October 2013.
defaultBorenstein, Seth.  ‘What 95% certainty of warming means to scientists’.  Associated Press, 24 September 2013. 
defaultBudescu, D. V.
default, 
defaultBroomell, S. 
defaultB.
default &amp; 
defaultPor, H.
default ‘
defaultImproving communication of uncertainty in the reports of the IPCC’
default. 
default 
defaultPsychol. Sci.
default 
default20
default, 
default299
default–
default308
default (
default2009
default).
defaultDoyle, 
defaultAlister
default. 
default‘Amid Uncertainty, scientists blame mankind for global warming’
default.
default Reuters, 18 September 2013
default.
defaultDoyle, Alister.  ‘UN draft stresses risk of global warming, from economy to health’.  Reuters, 8 November 2013. 
defaultPainter, James.  ‘Climate Change in the Media: Reporting Risk and Uncertainty’.  RISJ, September 2013. 
defaultShuckburgh, Emily, Rosie Robison, and N
defaultick Pidgeon.   ‘Climate Science, the Public and the News Media: Summary Findings of a Survey and Focus Groups Conducted in the UK in March 2011’. Living With Environmental Change, September 28th, 2012.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default