&#xa0;
defaultSubmission by the National Office of Animal HealthdefaultThe N
defaultational Offi
defaultce of Animal Health (NOAH) rep
defaultresents 
defaultaround 90% of 
defaultthe UK animal medicines industry.
defaultIts 
defaultaim is to promote the benefits of safe, effective, quality 
defaultmedicines for the health and welfare of all animals.
defaultNOAH
default welcome
defaults
default the chance to contribute to the EFRA Inquiry. 
defaultThis submission is 
defaultprimarily 
defaultbased on work done by NOAH in preparation for a conference
default 
defaultit organised called 
default“Feeding the World” held in Februar
defaulty 2011
default. 
defaultMore details of presentations made at this event are available on request.
defaultThis submission chiefly addresses 
defaultthe area of the EFRA Inquiry
default where animal medicines have most relevance.
default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe potential value and contribution of science and GM technology to UK food security. default&#xa0;
defaultAs the world population increases, demand for food from animals grows, as do concerns about the environmental impact of livestock farming, animal welfare and food safe
defaultty. 
defaultThe world’s population is predicted to reach 9.1 billion by 2050 and the demand for food from animals is expected to increase by up to 100%. Most of the increased production needed will come from improvements and greater efficiency in production techn
defaultology. The need for technology in livestock production is not only here to stay but
default 
defaultneeds
default 
defaultto grow. 
defaultMeat consumption will increase as the world population increases and as emerging economies become more affluent
default.
defaultLivestock are
default considered
default a major cause of g
defaultreenhouse emissions. But livestock are essential because they utilise marginal land (hill farming in the UK for example); food from animals provide high quality protein and livestock provide a
defaultn essential
default livelihood for world’s poorest communities
default.
defaultFor food
default security i
defaultntensification and improvement of efficiency are necessary as m
defaultodern farming methods can produce significantly more food than traditional systems through the use of improved genetics, improved nutrition
default, improved health
default and via economies of scal
defaulte.  
defaultAnimal welfare and productivity.defaultAnimal disease can cause significant losses to the agricultural sector as well as impacting negatively on animal welfare.
defaultIn the UK during the Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (BSE) epidemic more than 179,000 cattle we
defaultre infected and 4.4 million slaughtered during the eradication programme.
default[]
defaultIn recent years, outbreaks of Avian influenza resulted in the slaughter of over 100 million birds in Asia. Not only does animal disease cause suffering and death in animals, it also
default affects productivity. Overall, livestock efficiency is reduced by at least 20% by disease, meaning less food produced. Infectious disease in animals can also pose a threat to human health – up to 70% of human infectious diseases have their source in anima
defaultls.
defaultNOAH believes animal medicines have an important 
defaultand essential 
defaultrole to play in addressing these issues: The development and effective use of veterinary medicines
default, 
defaultparticularly
default vaccines,
default to combat disease is the most direct route for the animal health i
defaultndustry to contribute to the efficient rearing of livestock without compromising animal and human health or the environment.
defaultThere are many factors that affect the welfare of an animal but 
defaultthe 
defaultessential pre-requisite for the welfar
defaulte of any animal
default, and inde
defaulted its productivity,
default is good health
default.
defaultOverall livestock production efficiency globally is reduced at least 20% by disease 
default(
defaultsource: 
defaultFAO; OIE)
default&#xa0;
defaultVaccination has been successful in the control of diseases such as Rinderpest (not endemic in the UK), which
default used to kill up to 90% of cattle in affected herds in the 1980’s, but in 2010 
defaultwas
default entirely eradicated thanks to international co-operation and the use of a safe, effective vaccine. Fifteen years ago
default,
default to create a new vaccine for any disease would have alwa
defaultys taken many years (the average time for livestock products is 8-12 years) but with modern technologies we have been able to bring a vaccine to the market within a year, as demonstrated by the Bluetongue Virus outbreak and its successful control in 2007/0
default8. If Bluetongue, which had previously been exotic to Northern Europe, had taken hold in the UK up to 35 million sheep and 10 million cattle could have faced infection
default, which would have had a devastating impact on productivity, welcome and cost to the farm
defaulting industry and indirectly the consumer
default. The 
defaultprompt 
defaultavailability of an effective vaccine allowed farmers to take steps to protect their livestock by vaccinating.
defaultThere are a number of endemic diseases in the UK that we have still not controlled, for examp
defaultle BVD 
default(Bovine Viral Diarrhoea) 
defaultis estimated to be present in 70% of the UK dairy herd. It is not a zoonotic
default 
defaultdisease (ie one that is passed between animals and people)
default 
defaultso there are no food safety issues, but is it very damaging to fertility and productivit
defaulty. We have vaccines on the market to protect cattle, and whilst we accept that vaccination alone is not the solution, as it must be tackled in conjunction with better biosecurity. But through knowledge transfer and better awareness we could eradicate this 
defaultdisease. Many other member states have successfully achieved this goal and we can too – but we have to work together.
defaultWe could improve food productivity tomorrow if we put to use the existing medicines and vaccines we already have to 
defaulttheir full potential a
defaultnd continued 
defaultcorrect use. We must also make sure that those medicines are used responsibly and that is why NOAH is so closely engaged with, and committed to, the work of the Responsible Use of Animal Medicines Alliance (RUMA) which sets out guidelines for 
defaultresponsible use of antibiotics and anthelmintics.
defaultGetting a veterinary medicine to market is a long process and quite rightly has many regulatory hurdles. Whilst safety is paramount we have to balance this with pragmatism and not overly apply the Precautio
defaultnary Principle. We cannot live in a world of zero tolerance. A lot of the regulations our industry has to work under are derived from the human regulatory processes, many of which we consider are not necessary for animal medicines, therefore that is why NO
defaultAH and the collective animal industry are working through the European federation for animal health IFAH-Europe to put forward proposals to the next review of the European Directives to support a single regulatory process
default – the so called 1-1-1 concept of o
defaultne dossier, one assessment, one decision
default. This will provide dedicated regulatory process for the animal medicines industry, with still the same high emphasis on safety, efficacy and quality – but also a true ‘common market’ by allowing all medicines author
defaultised 
defaultin any member state to be available on any member state market. This 
defaultis needed to
default 
defaultincrease availability of medicines and speed up time to market. The draft legislation is expected from the European Commission in February 2014.
defaultResearch and Development
default for animal medicines is now truly global 
defaultbut n
defaultevertheless NOAH and the UK industry still plays its part. 
defaultThe
default UK Mirror group for the European Technology Platform for Global Animal 
defaultHealth,
default 
defaultan organisation that brings together the animal medicine industry, 
defaultthe veterinary profession, farmers, and academic researchers to identify disease threats within Europe and gaps where treatments or vaccines are unavailable, 
default(see DisConTools 
defaultat 
defaulthttp://www.discontools.eu/
default) 
defaulthas identified the key disease threats to the UK 
defaultemanating from the global food chain and strives to get our centres of excellence for Research and Development in the UK working for and contributing to the needs of the market in the future as well as enhancing medicines and vaccines for existing endemic 
defaultdiseases in the UK.
defaultMany vaccines still in use are derived from old technology (bacterins and whole virus preparations) despite the promise of molecular biology being so great. These have a proven track record – they are familiar
default, effective
default and safe
defaultAnd 
defaultalthough there have been some successes
default with new technologies bringing new vaccination solutions
default, biotechnology still has some hurdles to overcome
default, not least of which is perception and misconception.
defaultAddressing misconceptions defaultDespite the 
defaultbenefits 
defaultthat ani
defaultmal medicines can bring
default, with the publicity surrounding BSE, Bird Flu, Foot and Mouth Disease etc, it was perceived that consumer anxiety over food safety had grown. 
defaultIn 2010 and in preparation for the 2011 
defaultNOAH ‘Feeding the World’ c
defaultonference,
default NOAH decided 
defaultto find out what the consumer knew
default and did not know about vaccines
default and to 
defaultsee what
default misconceptions
default existed
default. 
defaultThese misconceptions were explored further through another survey in 2012
default (which was reported at a follow-up NOAH conference earlier in 2013 on ‘Addr
defaultessing misconceptions about animal medicines’
default. 
defaultIt found although there is trust in the system regulating animal medicines, there is still misunderstanding among the public about their role in livestock production. One of the key concerns was that vaccines 
defaultwould be transferred to food, which of course is not the case. There is extremely rigorous testing overseen by an independent body, the Veterinary Residues Committee (VRC)
default, reporting to the Veterinary Medicines Directorate
default, to make sure harmful animal 
defaultmedicine residues do
default 
defaultn
defaulto
defaultt get into the food chain. The VRC reports no residues of concern in UK
default food
default. 
defaultNOAH, along with others involved with medicines for livestock production, are working to see how best to provide information to help address misconception
defaults amongst consumers.
defaultIn conclusion:default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAnimal science has a part to play in food security today, and the 
defaultpotential 
defaultto change lives
default for the better
default in the future.
default The animal medicines 
defaultindustry 
defaultis working to stay 
defaultahead of the curve, and play 
defaultits
default part in contributing to the future security of the w
defaultorld’s food supply. 
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default