&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (LCI0019)defaultThe Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers 
default(CIBSE) 
defaultis the professional body that exists to:
default‘support
default the Science, Art and Practice of building services engineering, by providing our members and the public with first class information’ 
defaultCIBSE members are the engineers who design, install, operate, maintain and refurbish the energy using systems installed 
defaultin buildings, including homes, and are specifically trained in the 
defaultdesign and installation of low carbon building fabric and the associated 
defaultsystems for the provision of heating and hot water, lighting, ventilation and cooling and small power distribution i
defaultn homes.
defaultAs an Institution CIBSE publishes Guidance and Codes which provide best practice advice and are internationally recognised as authoritative. The CIBSE Knowledge Portal, makes our Guidance available online to all CIBSE members and is the leading sy
defaultstematic engineering resource for the building services sector. Over the last 
defaulttwo years
default it has been accessed over 200,000 times, and is used regularly by our members to access the latest guidance material for the profession. Currently we have users in over
default 170 countries, demonstrating the world leading position of UK engineering expertise in this field.
defaultCIBSE is pleased to respond to 
defaultthe 
defaultC
defaultommittee’s
default consultation on 
defaultLow Carbon Innovation.
defaultSummary of CIBSE defaultResponsedefault1. There is tdefaultoo much focus defaultin the Governmentdefault’s approach to Low carbon Innovation defaulton individual measures or defaultincentives and insufficient focus on systems integrationdefault and on feedback and analysis of the performance of incentivised low carbon measuresdefault. default2. defaultThe current strategy does not reflect that used elsewhere in Government default of first reducing energy use through efficiency, then reducing energy use through low carbon systems, and only then delivering energy through low carbon or renewable generation. default3. Tdefaulthere is insufficient attention to existing buildings and the specific consumer or user aspects of promoting low carbon interventions in existing buildings, and undue emphasis on retrofitting bolt on low carbon technology. default4. There is insufficient defaultsupport defaultfor the innovations required for default the delivery of existing policies such as the energy performance of buildings regulations and building regulations. defaultQ1. defaultWill the Government’s current approach towards low carbon innovation help to achieve the UK’s legaldefaultly binding targets at the lowest possible cost?default1. 
defaultThe 
defaultassociated 
defaultNAO 
defaultReport 
defaulthas quoted the IIASA 
defaultGlobal Energy Assessment’s conclusion
default that innovation plays a key role in the delivery of a low carbon global economy. Many of the innovations that will be de
defaultployed over the next decades to meet the UK’s target will have been developed by industries abroad
default eager to capture global markets
default. European manufacturers are taking leading roles in technology like organic LED’s, High Voltage DC transmission and smart gri
defaultd control. The Department inherited 
defaultpossibly
default the most incoherent programme of 
defaultpublic sector 
defaultresearch amongst its 
defaultinternational 
defaultpeers, and its approach 
defaultto 
defaultconsolidation and co-ordination is widely welcomed. 
defaultW
defaulthether
default,
default 
defaultwhen 
defaultviewed in hindsight
default,
default this consolidation 
defaultwill be seen to have delivered
default the 
defaultUK’s 
defaulttargets at the lowest cost
default,
default is a harder question. 
default2. 
defaultEnergy
default engineering
default, 
defaultwhether 
defaultcollecting biomass 
defaultor 
defaultdistributing 
defaultelectrical 
defaultpower is a set of interconnected systems. Systems incorrectly analyz
defaulted deliver less than the sum of their parts.  This is as true in cutting edge 
defaultlow energy 
defaultbuilding design as it is in many other fields. Indeed this Institution has 
defaultrecently 
defaultprioritised looking at city level 
defaultenergy 
defaultsystems as key to delivering the full prom
defaultise of technology
default to meet low carbon targets
default. This 
defaultimportant 
defaulturban
default-level
default 
defaulttheme 
defaultwas also 
defaultechoed in the IIASA report. We find the Governments innovation plans very patchy 
defaultin resolving the inevitable systemic issues
default in target delivery
default. 
defaultTo achieve outcomes tha
defaultt are efficient and effective, i
defaultnnovation in deployment is at least
default,
default if not more critical
default,
default than innovation in components.
default3. Innovation in deployment requires a greater degree of integration between policies than is currently achieved. For example, there a
defaultre several incentive schemes for the delivery of low carbon building technologies, the feed in tariff for photovoltaics and the renewable heat incentive for biomass heating, solar thermal and heat pump systems. When first launched 
defaultnone 
defaultof these required an
defaulty minimum level of energy efficiency to be present in buildings in receipt of the incentive payments, even though the installation of basic insulation and draft proofing would have delivered a far better return on investment than the investment in renewabl
defaulte systems. This clearly fails the test of delivering low carbon innovation at lowest cost. 
default4. 
defaultIn contrast 
defaultthe Department for Communities and Local Government, they have adopted a hierarchical approach to delivering “zero carbon” buildings, 
default[[to include it
default would be a bit of a diversion]]
defaultThis sets out the policy approach of seeking improvements in building fabric first, then seeking to reduce the emissions from the installed energy using systems, called carbon compliance, and only then looking to install ren
defaultewables (or using “allowable solutions” instead). Whilst “allowable solutions” demonstrate innovation in low carbon accountancy, they are unlikely to drive innovation in low carbon technology.
default5. A further frequently overlooked aspect of low carbon 
defaultinnovation relates to its successful integration into buildings
default as complex systems
default. Buildings are responsible for almost half of UK carbon emissions, and many of those which emit the highest levels of carbon per unit floor area are the most complex. In the
defaultory, Building Regulations require that these buildings have the
defaultir
default complex energy systems properly installed, tested, and commissioned, or put into practical operation. In practice, it is widely understood in the industry that the various minimum legal requ
defaultirements to commission building services systems are honoured in the breach. 
default6. There is also evidence to suggest that the measures required by the energy performance of buildings regulations, which implement the eponymous Directive, are widely 
defaultoverlooked
default, leaving building owners individually, and DCLG, DECC and other policymakers unaware of current levels of energy performance of much of the building stock. It 
defaultis
default 
defaulttherefore very 
defaulthard 
defaultto argue that low carbon building innovation is being delivered on the sc
defaultale it should be, let alone at lowest cost.
default A strong driver for innovation would be if new buildings procured by Government were required to deliver a Display Energy Certificate rating of A in 
defaultthe relevant
default c
defaultategory
default. 
defaultDEC’s focus on real out turns not simply
default design calculations made pre-tender.
defaultQ2.defaultDoes the Government have the right balance of focus between energy efficiency, renewable energy and other low carbon technologies?default7. 
defaultThis I
defaultnstitution has long been concerned at the inverted pyramid of public sector funding for energy research.  Research that improves the efficiency and efficacy of energy use may be messy but that is not a reason to deprioritise it against far blue skies resea
defaultrch agendas like fusion, which often have little industrial relevance to the UK. 
defaultThis issue goes far beyond a low carbon agenda. If international consensus was to fail and the UK carbon target was to fade, the economy still has the pressing problem of rema
defaultining 
defaultglobally 
defaultcompetitive should its marginal fuel remain LNG, 
defaultcurrently 
defaultthe most expensive 
defaultfossil 
defaultfuel of all. 
default8. Given the current levels of concern about the falling capacity margin in the wholesale electricity market, any policy which can deliver significant reductions in carbon emissions and energy demand has the potential to reduce the risk of power supply dis
defaultruption. Energy efficiency, or enabling people not to use as much energy without impairing their comfort, enjoyment or productive use of buildings is the lowest cost route to reducing UK electricity and gas demand. It may not require huge levels of technic
defaultal research, but some of the research into consumer behaviour and reaction to energy efficiency propositions shows that more needs to be done to deliver consumer acceptable low carbon building refurbishment
default.
defaultQ3. defaultWhat outcomes, if any, are the LCICG likelydefault to achieve? How should its forthcoming strategy drive more investment into low carbon innovation, and how should it measure success?default9. 
defaultIn the built environment sector, 
defaultwhich is 
defaultitself a significant part of the 
defaultUK 
defaultcarbon footprint
default,
default market pull rather than
default technology push has been the defining paradigm of successful innovation. Unfortunately a
default procurement
default incentive plan with sufficient stability to create confidence has seldom been 
defaultthe outcome. 
default&#xa0;
default10. 
defaultFor example 
defaultlevel 6 of the
default Code for Sustainable Homes had
default been both a test bed for new technology and a market pull for better overall performance of housing
default. As Code levels became economically achie
defaultv
defaultable 
defaultby the industry at large 
defaultthey could
default be later encapsulated in Building Regulations. We now understand that in
default England 
defaultat least (
defaultand 
defaultpossibly also 
defaultWales
default)
default the 
defaultproposed
default Housing Standards 
defaultReview 
defaultwill 
defaultlead to a winding down of the Code and public sector housing procurement will 
defaultno longer link to it
default. 
default 
defaultA
defaultn important incentive 
defaultfor innovation 
defaulthas 
defaulttherefore 
defaultbeen removed in 
defaulta critical area. Some of the leading specialist
default firms
default who have provided much of the innovation 
defaultin this sector 
defaultnow face a difficult time
default, with little obvious prospect of their investments in levels 5 and 6 being profitable
default. 
defaultIf there were short comings with 
defaultthe Code, given its innovation importance, they sh
defaulto
defaultuld have been addressed rather than the Code abandoned.
default11. 
defaultCloser to home, LCICG should look to 
defaultthe need for some stability in funding arrangements, and for 
defaultsmoother transitions between incentive schemes.
default 
defaultThe current hiatus over the Energy Company Obligation has led to an almost total moratorium on new projects being approved, with very serious implications for the specialists who provide installations under ECO. These installers have to be certificated un
defaultder the Green Deal installer rules, a process which will have cost them. Now, without the regulated workstream they expected from the ECO, they have to compete on the open unregulated market with those variously described as “cowboy” or “rogue” traders, wh
defaultere they cannot hope to recoup the costs of investing in Green Deal approval and certification. 
defaultTheir learning curves gains from repeated quality installations will be dispersed. 
defaultThe changes to the ECO arrangements threaten to penalise those installers mos
defaultt likely to be working to 
defaultand advancing 
defaultgood practice standards, and to reward those who stayed out of the ECO and Green Deal system. That is perverse. 
default&#xa0;
default12. 
defaultHowever, it is also a threat to future low carbon innovation schemes, as those who may consider be
defaultcoming early 
defaultinvestors
default will need to form a view on whether the scheme, and the political support for it, will be sufficien
defaulttly robust to justify the risk of early participat
defaultion
default. 
default&#xa0;
default13. 
defaultCurrent transitions 
defaultin the feed in tariff and renewable heat incentive al
defaultso 
defaultappea
defaultr to pay little heed to the col
defaultl
defaulta
defaultteral damage caused by abrupt change and funding hiatus. Specialist firms, and those most likely to provide innovative solutions, suffer most. In the present SME banking climate the effect can be terminal
default, and only 
defaultodd job cowboy contractors survive
default.
default&#xa0;
default14. 
defaultThe Committee has asked for views on metrics. 
defaultExperience suggests that metrics can cause more harm than good unless they closely reflect the objectives. 
defaultThe problems associated wioth a patents metric provides a good
default example. 
defaultF
defaultinding a faster, cheaper way to install a solar collector is never likely to obtain a patent, but would revolutionize the market
default since insulation costs now dominate
default. We note that the LCICG naturally chose patents as one possibility, without nece
defaultssarily recognizing that this could distort priorities. 
default&#xa0;
default15. In the market to retrofit low carbon solutions to existing buildings, the most significant innovations are likely to be process related, and not product related. Working out how to create a pack
defaultage of cost effective measures to improve the worst housing in a cost effective manner will require innovation, but not patents. Perhaps metrics need to be applied to successful outcomes in the form of measurable low carbon results in buildings. The emphas
defaultis needs to be on measured practical low carbon outcomes on site, and not on predicted theoretical results in a building simulation or design. 
defaultQ4. defaultAre the Government &amp; LCICG targeting investmentdefault towards the most effective stages of the innovation process, including over the long-term?default16. 
defaultWe do not believe that is currently true for the built environment. While enthusiasts often promote the idea of learning 
defaultrat
defaultes to justify 
defaultinvestment in expensiv
defaulte renewables technology, it is hard to see how the argument can apply when there is so little investment in collecting 
defaultdata from which to 
defaultlearn.  Integrating heat pumps into heating systems is a case in point. Manufacturers’ test data suggested impressive 
defaultperformance
default from the latest models
default. 
defaultBut i
defaultt required an initiative by the Energy Savings Trust to actually test the field performance of some 80 installations. Needless to say because of a lack of knowledge about critical systems
default integration
default issues the actu
defaultal performance was disappointing. 
defaultYet CERT had installed some 8,000 heat pump installations without any feedback or learning.  
defaultNAO recently commented on the general lack of feedback information during their review of the Levy Control Framework.
default17. 
defaultIt is e
defaultven impossible to access 
defaultstatutory 
defaultDisplay Energy Certificate 
default(
defaultD
defaultEC) d
defaultata 
defaultin quantity 
defaultonline without incurring 
defaultsignificant 
defaultfees, despite the availability of benchmarking data being critical for the confident roll out of new technology.
default Although energy perfo
defaultrmance data is essential to the improvement of our building stock, DCLG is tied into a contract for the management of the national database of energy certificate data under which access to the data is only available at considerable expense. In the case of 
defaultDEC data, which is required to be displayed in public buildings, and is therefore publicly available data, to obtain that data in aggregate form from Landmark is prohibitively expensive. 
defaultQ5. defaultWhat is the impact of the short-term funding timelines on privatdefaulte sector investment?default18. 
defaultThe Institution can only offer an observation. Modern R&amp;D is a fast moving area. For example smart grids built today might be obsolete in 5 years time such is the pace of IT technology. What is often a greater disincentive
default than fun
defaultding length
default, especially when trying to incorporate new technology into a real project
default,
default is the front end delay in obtaining final approval
default from a support scheme
default.  Whether delays are unavoidable it is hard to say from 
defaultthe 
defaultoutside
default, but our own research fund 
defaultcan 
defaultmake allocative decisions within weeks.
defaultQ6. defaultHow should DECC ensure that its remaining capital allocation for low carbon innovation will be spent wisely, after two years of underspend?default19. 
defaultThe Institution suggests th
defaultat the Committee might wish to 
defaulte
defaultn
defaultquir
defaulte whether the underspend relates 
defaultin part 
defaultto Departmental staffing levels.  In other areas of Government recent staff reductions have had a disproportionate reduction in in-house technical skills able to process projects with confidence.
default20. The Department 
defaultmight consider that any initiative to increase spending should focus on improving system integration and outcomes, and on measuring actual practical performance of some of the early installations under the various existing schemes.
defaultQ7. defaultHow is the Governmendefaultt maximising opportunities to learn from and partner with international partners within and beyond the EU?default21. 
defaultCIBSE’s membership is worldwide.  We work closely with our US sister organisation 
defaultASHRAE 
defaultand we are an active member in the Europe wide equivalen
defaultt REHVA.  Most of the public sector research is indeed in the public domain, and many of the companies involved in innovation are themselves global in reach. Possibly the starkest comparison is in the style of 
defaultinnovation
default procurement. The US Department of E
defaultnergy funds large programmes through experienced prime contractors, much as the 1970’s 
defaultUK 
defaultDepartment of Energy used the UKEA to run the programmes of the Energy Efficiency Office. 
defaultUS 
defaultGovernment is also a strong provider of market pull for innovation, espec
defaultially the Department of Defense. 
defaultThis May
default,
default for example
default,
default DOD connected its Fort Bliss embedded generation system into the Texa
defaults power grid, showcasing Lockhee
defaultd smart grid controllers. 
default In Europe larg
defaulte metrop
defaulto
defaultl
defaultitan authorities are frequently involved in the 
defaultprocurement of innovative solutions such as advanced waste combustion and heat distribution. The po
defaultw
defaulter of informed and challenging procurement along the technology strategy trajectory is noticeable by its absence in the UK
default programmes
default.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default See the report on the EPSRC funded CALEBRE project on energy efficient renovation of homes.
default 
default