&#xa0;
defaultAdditional defaultwritten defaultevidence defaultfrom the Open Data User Groupdefault (ODUG)default [OD 29]default&#xa0;
defaultIntroduction
defaultThe Open Data User Group
default (ODUG)
default welcomes this opportunity to provide additional evidence to the 
defaulti
defaultnquiry 
defaulton statistics and open data 
defaultand to clarify certain points in the light of 
defaultthe ora
defaultl evidence
default given to-date
default, 
defaultin particular that provided by M
defaultinisters from BIS
default and 
defaultthe Cabinet Office and the National Statistician
default.
defaultODUG is impressed by the breadth and d
defaultepth of the 
defaultinquiry
default. Informed questioning from the committee is bringing to light a range of 
defaultcontradictions in government policy which need to 
defaultbe 
defaultresolved if open d
defaultata is to contribute fully to the accountability, choice and growth agendas as laid out in t
defaulthe Open Data White Paper
default.
defaultIn this additional evidence we will outline a number of principles that have been raised by and with the committee. We will also provide short case studies that illustrate these 
defaultprinciples
default and other relevant documents as appendic
defaultes to this evidence.
defaultIssues raised as a result of evidence given to the committee
defaultA number of witnesses 
defaultreferred to the National Information Infrastructure
default (NII)
default as proposed in the Shakespeare Review
default. ODUG welcomes the strong encouragement for government departments to choose their “most important” datasets and to ensure that those are made available under the Open Government Licence (OGL) as open data.
defaultHowever, 
defaultit is our view that 
defaultthe 
defaultcurrently selected 
defaultdepartment data sets will not necessarily provide a coherent “infrastructure”.
default Also, w
defaulthil
defaultst
default the number of data sets released by particular departments may be a useful indicator of that department’s commitment to t
defaulthe open data agenda, data sets that have been held back, for reasons other than the protection of personal data, may be a better indicator of a lack of commitment, for whatever reason, to open data.
defaultODUG also believes that not all data sets are of equal im
defaultportance. In our view the term “
defaultcore 
defaultreference
default data
default” should be reserved for data sets which are the primary source of an identifier such as a VAT number, a Company Number, a Unique Property Reference Number (UPRN), a Postcode or a code used to identify a s
defaulttatistical or administrative area.
defaultSuch 
defaultcore 
defaultreference 
defaultdata is essential to allow 
defaultother 
defaultdata sets to be linked and to check the quality of data. This point was well made by Jil Matheson, the National Statistician, in relation to the National Address Regist
defaulter. Th
defaultis is a particularly important 
defaultcore reference data 
defaultset
default which we discuss
default, as a case study, in Appendix 1
default. Its 
defaultspecial
default importance was also noted in the Open Data White Paper
default1
default which included
default a commitment to resolve the issue of national address data.
defaultTh
defaulte Office for National Statistics has a very good reco
defaultrd of releasing core reference data
default relating to statistical or administrative areas as open data. These include the ONS Standard Names And Codes (SNAC) database and the ONS Postcode Directory 
default(
defaults
defaultee Append
defaultix 3) 
defaultwhich has only relatively recently 
defaultbecome available as Open Data because it was previously kept closed under the commercial GridLink agreement between ONS, Royal Mail and Ordnance Survey
default (OS)
default. 
defaultT
defaulthe ONS Postcode 
defaultdirectory, while very useful
default,
default only prov
defaultides Postcode
defaults
default to administrative and statistical area conversions 
defaultand 
defaultdoes not list individual addresses (postcodes on average refer to about 14 addresses).
defaultWhere core reference data is not made available this may prevent the release of other data sets as 
defaultopen data in a usable form
default or the ability to derive the maximum benefit from datasets which are made open
default. Many of the requests for open data on data.gov.uk are for addressed lists of particular types of facilities, such as schools or libraries, or for dat
defaulta about properties such as Energy Performance Certificate Data. An 
defaultO
defaultpen National Address 
defaultR
defaultegister would ensure that all such data sets could be referenced using a Unique Property Reference Number from which a correct administrative or postal address could 
defaultbe established. Without access to an 
defaultO
defaultpen National Address Register either such data isn’t published, or it is published with non-standard addresses making it difficult to match to 
defaultand combine with 
defaultother data sets.
defaultODUG notes that the term Nati
defaultonal 
defaultInformation Infrastructure
default 
defaultmight imply that a new “infrastructure” needs to be built. We believe that much of the infrastructure and much of the data that could and should be released as open data already exist
defaults
default. We concur with APPSI (the Advisory Panel on
default Public Sector Information
default)
default, who raised many of the issues associated with making the National Information Infrastructure work in their October 2012 Discussion Paper on a National Information Framework
default.
defaultODUG believes that the data.gov.uk data request form
defaults submitted by the public provide an equal, or more valid measure of what should constitute either “core data”, or “core 
defaultreference
default data” in a National Information Infrastructure
default, rather
default than the data sets offered by departments.
default We also question the criter
defaultia by which departments have been asked to identify their data inventories for the NII, and suspect that there are many useful datasets which are not, as yet, part of the NII.
defaultHowever, g
defaultiven that departments are 
defaultnow 
defaultstrongly encouraged to provide an invent
defaultory of unpublished data sets we believe that 
defaultimmediate 
defaulteffort is best expended on releasing that data which has been requested, 
defaultor identified in the NII, with a focus on the data requested as this 
defaultcan be expected to be put to immediate beneficial use, 
defaultrath
defaulter than trying to release all data particularly where data has to be documented or refined for release. ODUG can, and does, assist in the assessment and interpretation of open data 
defaultrequests and the prioritisation of further datasets identified in the NII.
default&#xa0;
defaultDespite 
defaulta government commitment to open policy making ODUG has noticed a marked disparity between the openness of 
defaultthe 
defaultdecisions
default made
default to open datasets 
defaultwith 
defaultthe requirement to make business cases for 
defaultreleasing
default data
default and the closed
default, often
default unaccountable
default,
default process
default associated with decisions not to release data, or
default only
default to make data 
defaultavailable under a commercial license.
defaultSeveral 
defaultexamples characterise the problem. One was the decision to privatise the Royal Mail Postcod
defaulte Address File
default (PAF)
default (see Appendix 2)
default. 
defaultThe case for opening PAF was made publicly, while the advice that led to the decision to sell PAF with 
defaultthe 
defaultRoyal Mail was largely opaque or incomplete. For 
defaultexample Ofcom’s 
default2013 
defaultconsultation on PAF was redacted to the 
defaultpoint of being quite useless in assessing whether the price charged for PAF is ‘reasonable’, as required by the Posta
defaultl
default Services Acts (
defaultan example of 
defaultthe
default redaction
default in the Ofcom consultation 
defaultis provided in 
defaultAppendix 
default6).
defaultEqually, d
defaultespite substantial lobbying fr
defaultom many sources
default, over many years,
default to establish an 
defaultO
defaultpen National Address Register the Government’s decision
default, in 
default2010 
defaultto set up GeoPlace LLP a limited liability partnership between Ordnance Survey
default 
defaultand 
defaultthe Local G
defaultovernment Association
default (LGA) 
defaultwas presented as a
default simple unjustified announcement. GeoPlace
default’
defaults corporate structure is one chosen by many Private Equity companies because it allows the financial dealings of the company to be priva
defaultte. The annual statement of GeoP
defaultlace LLP
default 
defaultcontains no financial information o
defaultther than the three main sources of revenue
default and the anticipation that GeoP
defaultlace will produce a surplus which will be returned to OS and the LGA.
defaultA final example of closed policy making, which is still under consideration, concerns the obstruction of Her Maj
defaultesty’s Land Registry open data programme. HMLR are obliged, under the European INSPIRE legislation
default,
default as transposed into UK law, to make a cadastral (property ownership parcel) dataset publicly available. HMLR 
defaultare
default inclined, in line with their exemplary open 
defaultdata policies on house price data, to make the outlines of the land parcels openly available for general re-use
default, and have released this data
default as open data. However the
default open use of the data 
defaultis 
defaultbeing 
defaultimpeded by 
defaultthe 
defaultOrdnance Survey who claim that the land parc
defaultels are 
defaultOS 
default‘derived data’ and any commercial re-use 
defaultwill involve a d
defaultata royalty 
defaultpaid directly 
defaultto 
defaultthe 
defaultOrdnance Survey, despite the fact that OS neither 
defaultowns, maintains 
defaultor delivers this data
default (Appendix 4)
default.
defaultThe 
defaultrationale for the Ordnance Survey’s stance and th
defaulte level of royalty payments has
default been extraordinarily hard to ascertain and, as a result, the HMLR data is still not available for 
defaultopen 
defaultre-use. A publicly owned company KentGIS, 
defaultwhich should have access to the 
defaultINSPIRE cadastral 
defaultdata under the Public Sector 
defaultMapping Agreement (PSMA)
default,
default 
defaultfunded by the government
default, 
defaultrecently 
defaultcreated a useful display service for the data which
default 
defaultallowed the public to view Land Parcels
default nationally, for free. However this service has recently been
default closed down following a protest from Ordna
defaultnce Survey.
default So, despite the best efforts of HMLR, the INSPIRE data is not open for either public or private sector use and re-use.
defaultThere are many more examples where a government department or agency decides not to make publicly funded data openly availabl
defaulte for viewing and re-use
default. 
defaultODUG, on behalf of data consumers, is working to make the case that certain individual datasets of high potential value to the wider economy should be made open. However, despite the presumption that public data should be made ope
defaultn
default, as the c
defaultommittee has noted, there is no-
defaultone in government, outside the Cabinet Office, to ensure that open data policies 
defaultare enforced and
default littl
defaulte consistency across government around the decision-making process for opening up data.
default&#xa0;
defaultNormally 
defaultgovernment open data is public sector information which is necessary in order to perform a specific public task. Such data has been fully funded by the budget for that task and can be released as open 
defaultdata
default at a marginal cost which in an Internet environment is likely to be close to zero.
default The cost 
defaultof the
default release of such data can usually be absorbed into the public task budget that led to the data being created and maintained. 
defaultMore problematic is data wh
defaultich is not associated with any one specific public task but is used widely across government. Such data includes statistical information and geospatial information. Following the Rayner review which started in 1979 and reported in 1982 an internal market w
defaultas created for statistical and geospatial information. 
defaultGovernment departments were expected to pay for such information and to act as intelligent customers. In the case of statistical information, the job of re-selling the information, in particular Censu
defaults information
default,
default was given to private, for
default-
defaultprofit census agencies, which paid an annual lice
defaultnce fee for the privilege of 
defaultselling census data. This led to a situation where some government agencies found Census data too expensive to use. Ordnance Survey also 
defaultmoved, more successfully, into cost recovery trading and successfully recovered a larger proportion of its costs than the statistical service.
defaultAround 2000 a review of Crown Copyright data was carried out 
defaultwhich found
default that the statistical service was recover
defaulting a 
defaultvery 
defaultlow proportion of its costs, while government departments were being deprived of access to necessary statistical information. Statistical information 
defaultthen 
defaultcame out of the cost recovery / tradable information regime and effectively became open da
defaultta. Since that time the usage, the variety and the quality of statistical information has increased markedly.
defaultAt about the same time the Ordnance Survey was confirmed as a trading fund and was expected to move towards 100% cost recovery and now returns a s
defaultignificant surplus to the 
defaultTreasury. However much of this cost recovery and surplus
default is illusory because Ordnance Survey earns a relatively low proportion of its revenue from the private sector. The bulk of its revenue comes from 
defaultgovernment 
defaultpayments for the 
defaultPublic Sector Mapping Agreement 
default(PSMA) 
defaultand for Ordnance Survey Open Data.
defaultIn the same way that some Government departments could not afford to buy statistical information when the cost recovery regime was in place, prior to the Public Sector Mapping Agreem
defaultent, departments, including ONS, could not afford access to all the Ordnance Survey Data that they could, or should have used.
defaultA
default significant amount of 
defaultOrdnance Survey’s 
defaultsupposedly private sector revenue is actually derived from quasi-private bodies such as
default not
default-
defaultfor
default-
defaultprofit Housing Associations, the utilities and from the sale of maps for planning applications for which there is little or no competition and which generate disproportionately large revenues for Ordnance Survey and their re-seller partners. All o
defaultf these 
defaultsupposed trading revenues are high surplus monopoly rents, which are effectively a tax on data use 
defaultrather 
defaultthan no
defaultrmal competitive market profits. It is important also, to put th
defaulte surplus OS returns to the treasury
default into the context of the very subst
defaultantial market for geospatial information in which 
defaultit
default operates which is estimated to be worth £bns a year. Despite their monopoly position OS captures very little 
defaultvalue from the overall 
defaultmarket. ODUG believes that
default this is a growth opportunity for the UK and
default,
default were OS to open up its data, there would be substantial opportunities for private companies in this sector
default. We believe that the OS should be funded by government to perform its important public task, as the National Mapping Agency, but that the commercial
defaultisation of this data, and the many derivative products and services it can drive is best left to the private sector. 
defaultAn alternat
defaulte regime for recovering
default the costs of
default currently charged for government information, mainly from the trading funds
default,
default could be base
defaultd on charging those who cause core reference information to change, rather than those who seek to use it. This is the model that allows Land Registry and Companies House to release significant and increasing parts of their data holdings as open data.
default&#xa0;
defaultOpen data is justified in the Open Data White Paper because of the impact it has on Transparency, Efficiency, Accountability, Citizen 
defaultC
defaulthoice and Economic Growth. Yet much of the argument and most of the business cases demanded for open data 
defaulthave to be centred on evidenced economic growth. This is difficult to prove as projections are inevitably conjectural
default and it is very difficult
default, if not impossible, to
default identify the enterprises that will grow as a result of 
defaultan 
defaultopen data release.
defaultHowever a rec
defaultent article in the Financial Pages of the New Yorker has been widely acclaimed as explaining why crude attempts to measure the impact of open data on GDP may be incorrect (Appendix 7 – Gross Domestic Freebie). 
defaultWitnesses and some members of the committee a
defaultppeared to believe that an important reason for not releasing open data is that it gives large multinational corporations (such as Google and Microsoft for example) a free ride and that they should not be let off from paying a fair price for the informatio
defaultn infrastructure that they use. However this ignores the fact that most of them are choosing not to licence or pay for government information at present. The effect of charging for data doesn’t impact on the multinationals at all, 
defaultas the amounts they are c
defaultharged have no material impact on their bottom line. However, charging for the data
default prevent
defaults
default the societal benefits that would accrue to all citizen
defaults
default from easier free access to data as well as the Small and Medium businesses that would generate new products
default and services on the back of open data
default, unencumbered by complex and costly licensing regimes.
defaultCharging for data, rather than bringing in addition revenue from large wealthy corporations, limits use of the data to medium sized companies. What is worse is th
defaultat the revenue isn’t being used to maintain the data itself, which is a relatively inexpensive process. It is being used to maintain the bloated sales, marketing, and administrative structures necessary to protect the intellectual property rights of the or
defaultganisations that are keeping the data closed.
defaultIn his evidence to the inquiry the Minister of State for Business and Energy stated that the he was seeking ways to differentiate the costs of charged for public data for small businesses. ODUG does not think i
defaultt is possible to implement a differentiated pricing regime as suggested under the existing Information Fair Trader Scheme
default and EU State Aid rules
default. Equally the burden of putting in place such complex licensing regimes has already been noted as an inefficie
defaultncy in itself and as significant burden on small businesses. 
defaultWe believe that current levels of government expenditure on government produced public sector information, are 
defaultalready 
defaultsufficient to release that information as open data. Charging regimes 
defaultfund 
defaultan
default army of data use preventers creating jobs inventing pricing and licensing schemes which are unnecessary. As an example we illustrate this effect for the Royal Mail Postcode Address File (PAF)  in Appendix 2, though we are limited in the extent to which 
defaultwe can do so because of the secrecy that has surrounded the real cost of the PAF.
defaultSocietal benefit
default accrues when data is used. T
defaulthe New Yorker article 
defaultreports
default massive, though unmeasured, societal benefits accrue to all of those consuming ‘Free’
default services from
default c
defaultorporations such as Google, Microsoft, Twitter, Yahoo and Apple.  Of course each of these 
defaultbusinesses 
defaulthas alternative sources of revenue which fund their ‘free’ data and ‘free’ services. However, as this business model now dominates and consumers/citizen
defaults
default are used to consuming and using data at no 
defaultcost, but paying for the services in another way, it is counter-productive for a small number of government, or recently privatised
default,
default agencies to swim against this tide
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusiondefaultA number of previous select com
defaultmittees, and government advisers such as Sir Michael Scholar then Chair of the Statistics Authorities (see letter in Appendix 5) who have consistently called for an open data mechanism to maximise the beneficial use of public sector data.
defaultThese requests pr
defaultoposals and comments have consistently been ignored in order to chase the illusory revenues, which have never been delivered
default to their full potential
default, from closed data regimes.
defaultThe UK
default’
defaults leading role in the Open Government Partnership and the rapid move towa
defaultrds open public data in Europe and the US, which in turn is leading to massively greater data re-use, with associated societal benefits and economic growth potential, should lead the committee to recommend a rethink in government over the remaining closed 
defaultdata regimes. 
defaultWe would also welcome an endorsement by the committee 
defaultfor
default more open policy making in this area so that, at the very least, closed data decisions are as openly
default and transparently
default 
defaultjustified as
default is the case for open data.
default We would hope that
default,
default in t
defaulthe light of such transparency, open data would prevail more often.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/open-data-white-paper-unleashing-the-potential
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/shakespeare-review-of-public-sector-information
default 
defaulthttp://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/documents/nif-and-open-data.pdf
default 
defaulthttp://www.iahub.net/docs/1377773673189.pd
default 
defaulthttp://www.nationalarchives.gov.uk/information-management/ifts.htm
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/state-aid
default