&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultInternational Servicedefault&#xa0;defaultExecutive Summarydefault and recommendationsdefault&#xa0;
defaultInternational Servicedefault 
default 
defaultInternational Service is a development organisation that has been changing lives for the better for more than 60 years by empowering some of the 
defaultworld’s poorest and most marginalised people.
defaultOur international programmes are in West Africa, Latin America and the occupied Palestinian territory where social and economic inclusion for all people is central to our work.
defaultInternational Service’s developme
defaultnt
default 
defaultworkers support local project partners
default 
defaultwith specialist skills and knowledge so
default 
defaultthat they and their organisations grow
default 
defaultin effectiveness and impact.
defaultOur work is also about influencing the development and delivery
default 
defaultof human rights policies in the countries 
defaultwhere we operate on
default 
defaultbehalf of vulnerable and excluded groups of people.
defaultInternational Service is currently part of the consortium of agencies delivering the International Citizenship
default Service (ICS) 
defaultfunded through DFID.
defaultOur inclusion programme has a focus on
default disability and we also work with disability projects as part of our work within the ICS programme. 
defaultFurther information on International Service and our work can be found at 
defaultwww.internationalservice.org.
defaultuk
default 
defaultReasons for submissiondefaultWe are submitting evidence to this enquiry as we firmly believe that disability is still marginalised in international development. The omission of disability in the Millennium Development Goals 
defaultled to disability being left ou
defaultt of many development programmes.  A targeted approach is needed to redress the existing imbalance and the influence and action of DFID is vital in taking forward this agenda.
default 
defaultIdentified issues and proposed responsesdefaultOver 15% of the world
default’
defaults population 
defaulthave a disability. Disability is closely linked to poverty
default,
default and in developing countries this group is known to be one of the most marginalised and vulnerable in society.
defaultIt is commonly accepted that disabled people have lower employment rates and lower edu
defaultcational attainment (WHO) – and in developing countries access to employment and education is significantly reduced
default or non 
default-
defaultexistent
default.  There is also a financial loss for governments through lost productivity, and lost taxes through non or low employment of
default disabled people, alongside high health and social care costs. So inclusion makes sense economically and in terms of reducing poverty – a central aim of DFID policy.
defaultDisability has been 
defaultfurther 
defaultmarginalised through its omission from the Millennium Developm
defaultent Goals (MDGs)
default and
default as a result is
default frequently side-lined within mainstream development work. DFID has a clear role to play in influencing the formation of whatever replaces the MDGs in 2015 and ensuring that disability is firmly placed within the new fram
defaultework.
defaultThe United Nations Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities (CRPD)
default should underpin any disability development work – specifically the implementation of articles 4,
default 
default9,
default 
default24,
default 
default27 and 29
default – awareness raising, accessibility, education, work and 
defaultemployment, and participation in political and public life
default.
default The CRDP 
defaultprovides a clear international framework which 158 out of 193 UN member states have signed up to. Therefore, the CRPD provides a strong 
defaultand commonly accepted 
defaultplatform on which to build 
defaultfuture development wor
defaultk and measure achievement and impact.
defaultThe UK has in the past been a leader in disability development and in promoting inclusion and 
defaultthe 
defaultsocial model of disability. We still have much to share with other countries
default and specifically with
default NGOs and communities in developing cou
defaultntries through empowerment, cap
defaultacity building and advocacy. The development of a separate disability strategy by DFID 
defaultwould reinforce their commitment to the issue following 
defaultthe recent announcement that all
default new DFID-f
defaultunded schools will be made accessible to 
defaultdisabled children. A focused strategy would demonstrate that DFID give equal importance to disability as they do to other development areas and recognise the need to address some of the unique challenges across the 
defaultdisability sector in international development. 
defaultDisability should still remain part of DFIDs sector programmes, for example in education, health
default, livelihoods
default 
defaultetc., 
default but a stand-alone disability strategy and 
defaultprogramme of 
defaultfocused development work would rais
defaulte the profile and importance 
defaultof this work and make a greater, more sustainable 
defaultimpact.
default Active engagement of disabled people – including children and young adults is vital in developing any strategy
default and i
defaultn any development work overseas including in the plan
defaultning, management and monitoring of DFID programmes.
default This could be facilitated by development organisations already working with disabled peoples
default’
default organisations
default both in the UK and
default in developing countries.
defaultData and statistics on disability are weak, and ofte
defaultn inaccurate or incomplete in most developing countries
default,
default making it difficult to benchmark activity against need. Any influence or contribution DFID could make to strengthen this area would be valuable in enabling accurate identification and meeting of need
default.
default defaultConclusiondefaultInvestment in d
defaultisability
default with
defaultin 
defaultinternational 
defaultdevelopment remains marginalised. It is important that DFID sets a strong example in promoting the need to address disability not just as part of its sector 
defaultprogrammes
default but in its own right. A stra
defaulttegic framework developed with the full engagement of disabled people
default,
default and working alongside international development agencies with a disability focus would be the first step to achieving this. 
defaultInvestment in supporting research, data collection, capacity 
defaultbuilding and advocacy would underpin the development of services and opportunities for disabled people in developing countries
default,
default empowering and equipping them to make a valid, economically and socially productive, contribution to society.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default