&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Susan Hedley (LTD0006)
defaultMy concerns are:
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultDo local bodies (including local authorities, local enterprise partnerships, passenger transport executives, integrated transport authorities and local transport boards) have the capacity to assess, prioritise
default and deliver local transport schemes? What would the optimum delivery body look like?
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhat impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introduction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?
default-
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHow clear are the lines of accountdefaultability for local decision making on transport expenditure?default&#xa0;defaultSEE MY EMAIL BELOW TO CLLRS DAVEY, JACKSON, AND REIDdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultI 
defaultalso 
defaultrefer to the 
default-defaultPROPOSAL TO ESTABLISH A COMBINED AUTHORITY FOR DURHAM, NORTHUMBERLAND AND TYNE AND WEARdefault&#xa0;
default-defaultSee also defaultm
defaultinutes of Northum
defaultberland County Council Policy Board meeting, 24/6/13.
default&#xa0;
default-adefaultnddefault email below  from Karon Stubbs.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultMs Hedley – thanks for your email. Please find responses below detailed in 
defaultred
default.
defaultIf you have any other queries, please come back to me.
defaultRegards
defaultKaron Stubbs
default, 
defaultCommittee Services Manager
default, 
defaultDemocratic Services
default, 
defaultTransformation Group
default, 
defaultNorthumberland County Council
default10/12/2013
default  
defaultResponse to Consultation - Creation of a Combined Authority for the North EastdefaultDear Democratic Services
defaultThe comments link on your Forward Plan
default didn't work, so here is my comment via conventional email:
defaultWhy is this issue being discussed on 10/12/13, when the published deadline for the local consultation is 11/12/13? Will those who don't have time to respond until the last minute have their respodefaultnses duly considered with equal weight to those submitted before papers were prepared for the policy board meeting scheduled on 10/12/13default? defaultDue to the new timetable this matter will now be dealt with by a Special Policy Board on 17defaultthdefault December. A number of otdefaulther authorities are also holding additional Cabinet or Executive meetings to meet the timeframedefaultWhich working groups and scrutiny committees are dealing with this issue?defaultNone - due to the imposition of further consultation requirements there is insufficientdefault time to refer this matter to a working group or for pre-scrutiny. There is however a Peoples Panel scheduled for 12defaultthdefault DecemberdefaultWho are their members, and where can their minutes be found?defaultN/adefaultIf there is no longer going to be a chief executive's post, who defaultwill take his place alongside the leader sincedefault"the Chief Executive be authorised, in consultation with the Leader, to agree the terms of any documentation required to enable the Authority to become a constituent authority of the Combined Authority includidefaultng the constitutional arrangements" (REPORT OF THE CHIEF EXECUTIVEdefaultCreation of a Combined Authority, presented to Policy Board 24/6/13) ?defaultthis will now fall to the Head of Paid Service Mr Steven Masondefault.defaultThe agenda papers for the Policy Board meeting of 17 defaultDecember will be available on the Council’s website from Tuesday, 10 Decemberdefault.default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDear Cllrs Davey, Jackson, and Reid,
defaultAs promised in my online response to the Combined Authority local consultation, please find attached further details.
defaultI am not completely 
defaultnegative about this, but I am extremely concerned that the rural communities of Northumberland and County Durham will have no voice, particularly with regard to public transport, and also because we have already ended up in a unitary county authority witho
defaultut residents being able to vote on it.
defaultOur democratic powers seem to be moving further and further away from us.
defaultIn particular, of the two existing and three proposed combined authorities, 
defaultNorthumberland and County Durham would be the first 2 predominantlydefault rural authoritiesdefault to enter into such an arrangement. 
defaultI therefore think that there should be two representatives for Northumberland, one for the 50% of the population who live in the southeast and one for the 50% of the population who live in the rural codefaultmmunities.default Maybe there should be the same arrangement for rural County Durham as well, so that there would at least be some rural voice, even if it was still without any power compared to all of the other urban representatives.
defaultAt the very least, there shodefaultuld be an effective trial period and means of opting out for the rural areasdefault of Northumberland and County Durham if this arrangement is found not to be working for them. Before this proposal is allowed to proceed any further there should also be a
default guarantedefaulted level of service, investment, and protection from cutbacksdefault for each community, particularly small rural ones, many of which are already left with only the barest remnants of the services which they once had.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultNorthumberland County Council  default     
defaultCombined Authority Local Consultation,default default defaultDeadline 11/12/13default:default&#xa0;
defaultThinking about the seven local authority areas of Durham, Gateshead, Newcastle, Northumberland, North Tyneside, South Tyneside and Sunderland...
defaultthe provision of economic development and regeneration 
defaultYes
default...the effectiveness and efficiency of transport 
defaultNdefaultodefaultthe overall economic conditions 
defaultY
defaultes
defaultPlease tell us whydefaultA)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIT WOULD NOT PROVIDE EFFECTIVE REPRESENTATION AND SCRUTINY FOR THE NEEDS OF RURAL COMMUNITIES.
defaultB)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultNOT ENOUGH PEOPLE HAVE HAD A P
defaultROPER CHANCE TO FIND OUT ABOUT THE CONSULTATION AND RESPOND, THOUGH MANY WOULD PROBABLY HAVE VERY STRONG OPINIONS IF THEY KNEW ABOUT IT.
default&#xa0;
defaultA)defaultIn 
defaultt
defaulthe proposed form, if this doesn't work, we wou
defaultld not have the money for the legal process to reverse it.  W
defaulte sh
defaultould be able to have some 
defaultso
defaultrt
default 
defaultof trial period before committing.  In particular, of the 
defaulttwo
default existing and 
defaultthree
default proposed combined authorities, 
defaultNorthumberland and County Durham would be the first 2 predominantly rural authoritiesdefault to enter into such a
defaultn 
defaultarrangement
default.  It is already difficult for rural voices to be heard in these counties, because rural people without decent computer services and broadband, and with little or no public tran
defaults
defaultport access to public meetings and libraries, cannot take an equal 
defaultpart in consultations or effectively observe what is being 
defaultdecided in their name.  Given 
defaultthat
default five out of the seven authorities proposed for the North East leadership board are urban, and if the  L
defaulteader of 
defaultNorthumberland County Council
default is from the 
defaulturban
default ar
defaultea of the county,
default 
defaultas is currently and has previously 
defaultvery 
defaultoften been the case
default, there  would be 
defaultno voice speaking up for the communities in the default97% of the county which is classed as rural, and the 50 % of the population defaultwho livedefault 
defaultthere, defaultrather than in 
defaultthe 3%
default of urban land found in the south east of the county
default [N.C.C. website, key statistics about Northumberland].
default&#xa0;
defaultHaving worked for almost ten years in Morpeth, the site of County Hall and on the boundary between the rural southeast and the rest of Northumberla
defaultnd, it has become obvious to me that 
defaultdespite its situation, 
defaultmost people in Morpeth are not familiar with the location of most of the villages in the rural areas  which lie beyond three or four miles north and west of the town, and they certainly have littl
defaulte or no idea about the lives and work of the people who live there, or what services they may or may not have left to them.  If this is the case in Morpeth, on the edge of the rural area, there is little chance that anyone based in the south east of the co
defaultunty, and from that culture, has any real appreciation of the nature and needs of rural communities, even if they have the best intentions, and have been dealing with council business for the whole of their working lives.
defaultWhen the Unitary Authority was cre
defaultated in Northumberland, there was no official poll, and despite all of the unofficial polls appearing to show that about 90% of Northumberland residents objected to a Unitary Authority, those who had the power to do so forced it through anyway against
default the 
defaultwishes
default of most residents
default.
default Now, for certain issues, 
defaultthe majority of those 
defaulton the North East Leadership Board 
defaultwho are shaping crucial policies in our name are going to be impossibly remote should we wish to contact them or observe what is being done in our n
defaultame.  At present, if public transport allows, I can get to County Hall to observe a Policy Board or full Council meeting. It is almost certain that it will be too time consuming 
defaultand expensive 
defaultfor me to go to observe a North
default East L
defaulteadership Board meeting, e
defaultven if 
defaultI was allowed to, given that a high proportion of the matters being discussed under the headings of economic development and regeneration and transport are likely to be commercially sensitive.  It is likely to be remote 
defaulteven from my own County Counc
defaultil
defaultlor.
default  It is unlikely that the representatives of e.g. Sunderland and Newcastle could have any useful insight into the needs of e.g. Berwick
default-upon-Tweed and the north of Northumberland, which would most probably benefit from making better connections with 
defaultScotland rather than areas south of the Tyne anyway.
defaultI think that there should be two representatives for Northumberland, one for the 50% of the population who live in the southeast and one for the 50% of the population who live in the rural communities. defaultMaybe there should be the same arrangement for rural County Durham as well, so that there would at least be some rural voice, even if it was still without any power compared to all of the other urban representatives.defaultAt the very least
default, there should be an edefaultffective trial period and means of opting out for the rural areas of Northumberland and County Durham if this arrangement is found not to be working for them. defaultBefore thidefaults proposal is allowed to proceed any further tdefaulthere should also be a guaranteed level ofdefault service, investmentdefault, adefaultnd protection from cutbacks for default each community, particularly small rural ones, many of which are already left with only the barest remnants of the services which they once had.default&#xa0;defaultAlthough described in strict accuracy as voluntary, th
defaultis appears to be more a coerced response to current government policy which works against the interests of remote regions and communities
default.  A proposal defaultwhich is designed less in response to Westminster short termism and more as something which has had time defaultto be thoroughly and carefully considered and has grown out of the true long term needs of the region would serve us better.default&#xa0;defaultB)default              defaultThere is not enough detail in the current consultation for us to be able to givdefaulte a properly informed responsedefault,
default and as usual, n
defaultext to no
default-
defaultone who I have spoken to in the last week has any idea that this is happening, although the
defaulty do have strong views about it when asked.
default  Though the consultation is on the front page of the Northumberland County Council website, it only says consul
defaulttation and does not say what it is about until people actually go into it. Though many would be likely to have strong feelings about it, they are not likely to go into it unless they are already in the know.  It does not appear in the alerts at the top of 
defaultthe County Council home page, although more parochial consultations have appeared there in recent weeks, so unless people have time to investigate, they might well think that the consultation is about one of these parochial issues.  I know from speaking to
default people that a significant proportion are cancelling papers such as the Morpeth Herald and the Northumberland Gazette because they are looking for any ways to enable  their income to continue to cover their needs, so fewer people would be able to find out 
defaultabout the 
defaultconsultation from these sources.  
defaultWe therefore need an effective consultation so that people have had a defaultproperdefault chance to find out about it and respond.default&#xa0;
defaultPlease tell us whydefaultSee answer 2, section A above
default. 
default At the very least
default, there should be an effective trial period and means of opting out for the rural areas of Northumberland and County Durham if this arrangement is found not to be 
defaultworking for them
default, because 
defaultNorthumberland and County Durham would be the first 2 predominantly rural authoritiesdefault to enter into 
defaulta combined authority, so there are no precedents for this particular situation – it would be a learning experie
defaultnce, particularly b
defaultecause all of the other authorities are urban.  After all, 50% of the population of Northumberland is rural, and they have as much call to have their particular needs provided for as th
defaultose of the urban population are, but if representation is constituted a
defaults it is proposed at present, the likelihood is that they would have no true and accurate representation at all.
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease tell us wdefaulthydefaultI do not agreedefault that only 
defaultthe c
defaultommissioning and procurement of subsidised bus services
default should
default 
defaultbe devolved to Northumberland County Council. I think that 
defaultall defaultpublic transport services other than rail should be devolved to Northumberland and Durham County 
defaultCouncils, because the other authorities will have absolutely no understanding of or interest in rural transport issues, and these are essential for the viability of the lives of rural inhabitants and their communities.
defaultI think that there should be some rin
defaultg fencing of the interests of tourism in those counties for the same reasons, and because tourism is the basis for such a large part of the economy of those counties.  It would be disastrous for them if other initiatives were to blight our chances of attra
defaultcting tourists.
defaultOtherwise, I agree with a more co-ordinated approach for skills and economy.
default&#xa0;
defaultResident
default(Business representative
defaultVolunt
defaultary and community rep
defaultresentative
defaultLocal authority/ partner organisation rep
defaultresentative
defaultOther interested party
default)
default&#xa0;
default