&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from AXA Insurance (LTD0006)defaultAXA Insurance welcomes the publication of the Ministry of Justice’s Command Paper on ‘Reducing the number 
defaultand costs of whiplash claims.’
default defaultWe also welcome the Transport Select Committee’s ongoing inquiry into the issue of whiplash claims and their constructive contribution to the debate. 
defaultWhile we welcome the Government’s proposals as outlined in t
defaulthe Command Paper, we do have concerns that 
defaultmuch of the 
defaultdetail has still to be determined and that a number of key points 
defaultdo not seem to have been taken forward. In this respect we would like to make the following comments in respect of the Ministry of Just
defaultice’s response to consultation and the Committee’s own report and recommendations:
default2.1 Scope of scheme 
default2
default.1.a 
defaultIt is acknowledged that the detail of any scheme of truly independent specialist medical panels has yet to be established.
default However, we are concerned that the Ministry of Justice 
defaultonly 
defaultrefer
defaults
default to road traffic accident soft tissue injuries. There is 
defaulta disappointing
default omission in respect of psychological reaction to a road traffic accident such as travel anxiety. 
defaultR
defaultestricting the sch
defaulteme to soft tissue injuries runs the risk of moving the problem to other areas. 
defaultAlthough 
defaultpsychological reaction to alleged physical injury is unusual 
defaultand accounts for less than 1% of all motor claims registered with the Compensation Recovery Unit of the De
defaultpartment of Work and Pensions, allegations of travel anxiety or some form of psychological reaction is a common additional feature in many whiplash claims. I
defaultn the context of low value road traffic accidents an 
defaultundesirable 
defaultsituation could arise where
default, in fu
defaultture, there is 
defaulta robust
default medical 
defaultassessment
default process supported by an 
defaultaccreditation and monitoring process
default in place for physical injury
default, but
default a separate and potentially less rigorous approach in respect of reports addressing a
defaultny psychological reaction
default to a roa
defaultd traffic accident. 
default2.
default1.b 
defaultThe process in respect of better medical evidence 
defaultmust 
defaultapply to all injuries of whatever nature that arise in low value road traffic accident claims. 
default2.2 Accreditation 
default2.2.a It is pragmatic to draw on existing accreditation sch
defaultemes but stakeholders need to be satisfied as to the robustness of 
defaultthese 
defaultschemes and the extent to which they
default may 
defaultfeature in a new accreditation scheme . Existing forms of accreditation will have been put in place by medical reporting agencies
default,
default some of who
defaultm will have contributed to the whiplash problem that Government is seeking to address. 
default2.2.b A random element of peer review is essential. Although 
defaultwe support
default the Select Committee’s view that the GMC could have a role in auditing of reports, audits must be carried out by 
defaultappropriate 
defaultpractitioners with experience of being an expert 
defaultwitness and of giving evidence in court. 
default2.3 Standardised Reports
default2
default.3.a 
defaultThe gene
defaultral and mandatory use of s
defaultta
defaultndardised reports 
defaultshould 
defaulthelp improve the quality of reporting. However, we are concerned that the Command Paper speaks of ensuring ‘information requirements are comprehensive but simplified as much as possible,’ but 
defaultdoes not co
defaultmment
default on the need to ensure that the examining medical practitioner has both claimant and defendant descriptions of the accident. This would enable 
defaultthe 
defaultmedical practitioner, as expert witness, to express a range of views that would assist the court in reac
defaulthing a decision should there be an issue in respect of causation or severity of injury received. 
default3
default.1 
defaultWe support the Committee’s recommendation that Government should consult on ways of 
defaultrequiring
default 
defaultclaimants to provide more detailed information in support of their claim. This would avoid the situation as arose in 
defaultH
defaultussain v Hussain 
default[2012] EWCA Civ 1367.
default 
defaultThis case also
default illustrates the challenges
default of
default seeking to combat suspected fraud. We support the Committee’s view that there should be a presumption against accepting claims where detailed independent evidence in support
default of the claim
default is not available. 
default&#xa0;
default3.2 A reduced limitation period for low value mo
defaulttor claims would help ensure that such independent corroborative evidence was still available. 
defaultWe are disappointed that the Committee’s recommendation in this respect is 
defaultnot 
defaultbeing taken forward. 
default&#xa0;
default3.3 We recommend that specific guidance is also given to th
defaulte courts in respect of low value of RTA claims. In respect of neck injuries, 
defaultat page 22 
defaultthe ‘Guidelines for the Assessment of General Damages in Personal 
defaultI
defaultnjury Claims in Northern Ireland’ says the following: 
default“The assessment of damages for whiplash injuri
defaultes requires particular care. Allegations of such injuries are easily made and 
defaultnot 
defaulteasily disproved. The medical experts are reliant on the honesty of plaintiffs. The evidence relating to such a claim requires careful scrutiny. It is for the plaintiff to pr
defaultove the existence and the nature of and the extent of the injuries. Exaggerated claims may call into question the very existence of whiplash injury. They may also result in the court being unable to be satisfied on the evidence as to the nature and extent 
defaultof the alleged whiplash injury. Where the court is not satisfied on a balance of probabilities of the existence of a whiplash injury there will be no award. Where the court is not satisfied on a balance of probabilities that the injury is of the nature and
default extent alleged the court may be left without any credible evidence on which to base an award. The court should make its findings of the fact on the issues of:
default(i)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhether a whiplash injury was sustained; and
default(ii)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIf so, the nature and extent of the injury. The
default 
defaultcourt should avoid simply making a small award to avoid the necessity of making findings on (i) and (ii)
default”
defaultWe
default advocate 
defaultthat the courts in England and Wales adopt similar guidance. Such guidance might have helped avoid the situations that arose in 
defaultCharnock
default v Rowan, Dar v Vonsak 
defaultand 
defaultHussain v Hussain
default where, in all cases issues of credibility and difficulties 
defaultin disproving
default 
defaultalleged injury arose
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4 We welcome the Committee’s recommendation that limiting the right to compensation where a claim is grossly exa
defaultggerated should be explored further. A contract of insurance is one of utmost good faith. It is a well established legal principle that if any part of a claim under a contract of insurance is exaggerated or fraudulent, the insurer is entitled to avoid the 
defaultwhole claim. At common law the same principle, notwithstanding the use of statements of truth, does not apply. We would refer the Committee to 
defaultNield v Loveday, Zurich v Haywood 
defaultand 
defaultSummers v Fairclough Homes 
defaultto illustrate the approach adopted at common law
default and where damages have been recovered where there has been significant exaggeration. 
defaultWe would refer the Committee to the Law Commission’s 12
defaultth
default programme of civil justice reform in respect of which the insurance industry is recommending that the law should
default be changed so that damages are not recovered at all in circumstances where there is fraud or fraudulent exaggeration.  
default&#xa0;
default3
default.5
default We are encouraged that the Ministry of Justice intends to work with stakeholders to develop baseline data in respect of neck and b
defaultack whiplash and other soft tissue injuries and will work to identify and classify fraudulent or exaggerated claims. However, we reiterate the point that evidentially proving fraud is challenging and that many claims, where there is a suspicion of fraud or
default exaggeration
default, are
default discontinued following robust challenge by defendant 
defaultinsurer or solicitor. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4
default.1 We are disappointed that the opportunity is not being taken to increase the small claims track limit for personal injury claims. We note that the Committee is concerned about the possibility of inequality of arms in personal injury claims; 
defaultwhile we unde
defaultrstand this concern, 
defaultwe 
defaultwould 
defaultemphasise that out of many thousand low value road traffic accident claims, only a very small proportion end in a court hearing. The risk of inequality of arms is minimal. 
default&#xa0;
default4.2 The perception of inequality of arms could be ea
defaultsily addressed by developing the Portal so as to enable access by direct claimants. In our opinion, extending the Portal to unrepresented claimants would enhance access to justice in a way that would be easy for the majority of potential claimants
default to pursu
defaulte claims for genuine personal injuries.
default Separate provision could be made for those who do
default not
default have access to a computer or who are not computer literate. 
default&#xa0;
default4.3 The Portal Stage 3 option of a paper based determination of a case would also overcome concerns 
defaultthat the access to justice can be complex and intimidating. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default