4
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from TravelWatch NorthWest (LTD0009)default&#xa0;
default1. Introduction default&#xa0;
default1.1 TravelWatch NorthWest (TWNW) is an independent Community Interest Company representing all public transport users in NW England. We are pleased to give our views as follows to this inquiry. 
default&#xa0;
default2. What is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to ddefaultevolve to a local level decision-making on transport expenditure? What are the advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?default&#xa0;
default2.1 
defaultTWNW subscribes to the current all
default-
defaultparty consensus that transport funding should be 
defaultdevolved to sub regional Combined Authorities (CAs)
default. 
defaultCA’s boundaries are generally based on journey to work areas in large sub regional City wide conurbations.
default 
defaultCare will be needed to ensure that their rural hinterlands are not neglected. There are histori
defaultc and more recent precedents supporting this model 
default.
default&#xa0;
default2.2 
defaultThe 
defaultLocal Democracy etc Act 2009default and the 
defaultLocalism Act 2011 defaultare surprisingly
default complementary with the former paving the way for new structures and the latter granting new powers and allowing the Secr
defaultetary of State to “pass on” functions, such as determining transport and economic strategies. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3 
defaultIn pursuit of localism the 2009 Act created 
defaultstatutorydefault Economic Prosperity Boards (EPBs) and the 2011 Act created 
defaultvoluntarydefault Local Enterprise Partnerships (LE
defaultPs).  Although a future government could abolish EPBs 
default in favour of LEPS there appears in any case to be little enthusiasm in the North West for their creation primarily as a mechanism for forming Combined Authorities (CAs),  
default&#xa0;
default2.4 
defaultTWNW 
defaultis
default not yet aware of the creation of any EPBs  but 
defaultis
default aware of CAs being formed by the mechanism of Integrated Transport Authorities (Local Transport Act 2008) embracing other partners
default. Also CAs may themselves take on the function of an EPB
default.
default T
defaulthe creation of
default a CA is a step in the formation, by partnership with relevant LEPs, 
defaultof Local Transport Bodiesdefault (Act 2009)
default&#xa0;
default2.5 
defaultEPB’s and LEP’s functions and boundaries are not necessarily co-terminal and TWNW 
defaultis
default concerned that new sub regional groups of local authorities 
defaultcould establish 
defaultstatutorydefault (Act 2009) EPBs in a manner that would override 
defaultLEPs who are 
defaultvoluntarydefault non statutory Partnerships between local government and others
default.  
default&#xa0;
default2.6 
defaultMore clarity is needed in respect of the 
defaultevolving roles of EPBs and LEPsdefault, and especially the role of both in the context of the establishment of 
defaultLocal Transport Bodefaultdiedefaults (LTBs).default defaultWe are particularly defaultconcerned defaultat the leveldefault of bureaucracy engendered by the establishment of defaultnon-elected LEPs and how they and LTBs relate to the establdefaultished and experienced Local Transport Authorities.  default default&#xa0;
default2.7
default Overarching all this in the North is the recent decision on 
defaultrail 
defaultfranchi
defaultsing
default renewal and partnership 
defaultannouncement between the 
defaultDfT
default and 
defaultRail
default 
defaultNorth
default as a step towards devolution. We see devolving this responsibility to a more local level to be in the best interests of rail passengers provided that adequate funding is available to tackle the significant backlogs of rolling stock replacement and enhance
defaultment and to enable 
defaultfull 
defaultinvestment in the Rail Strategy for the North.   
default 
default 
default&#xa0;default3. defaultDo local bodies (including local authorities, local enterprise partnerships, passenger transport executives, integrated transport authorities and local transport boards) have tdefaulthe capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes? What would the optimum delivery body look like?default&#xa0;default3.1 
defaultThe new devolved structures [Act 2009], powers and functions [Act 2011] of both elected
default and unelected
default  bodies are bound to create demographic deficits and also a “churning” of staff and probably in the short term unavoidable 
defaultskills shortagesdefault. However we are partially reassured by the general powers of wellbeing and competence [Act 2011] given to these bod
defaulties and to allow the Secretary of State to “pass on” functions as most appropriate. We would like to see these used to simplify the complex relationship between EPBs and LEPs whose boundaries and functions too rarely coincide.
default&#xa0;
default4. What is the best way of ddefaultealing with major transport schemes that cross local authority boundaries or have wider regional impact?default&#xa0;default4.1 
defaultThese may involve National agencies such as Network Rail and the Highways Agency, but they will also be funded from the EPBs’ Single Growth Fund (
defaultSLGF) which the LEPs will need to have already prioritised. A way will need to be found of resolving inevitable territorial, planning and financial discrepancies.  Whilst welcoming the capital in the Local Growth Fund
default  this comes at a time of growing reve
defaultnue budget challenges.
default&#xa0;
default5. How effectively do local bodies work with each other and with Government departments and national transport agencies?default&#xa0;
default5.1 
defaultLocal transport bodies have a poor record of co-operation. Even duties such as section 88 Transport Act 19
default86 requiring transport, social services and education providers to co-operate 
defaultwithin an authority
default are often observed mainly in the breach
default.
default&#xa0;
default5.2 
defaultWe are concerned that devolving powers to local government could result in 
defaultconflictsdefault (sometimes with transport e
defaultxpenditure consequences) between different tiers. This is currently manifest in the disagreement between the elected mayor of Liverpool and Merseytravel’s Integrated Transport Authority (and proposed Combined Authority) over the issue of the removal of the
default City’s bus lanes
default. 
defaultIt would be possible (Act 2011) to legislate for the election of Combined Authority mayors, which could remove this obstacle.
default6. Do the current funding streams for major local transport schemes meet the needs of local authorities? How do current funding streams compare with previous arrangements? default defaultWhat impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and thdefaulte introduction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?default6.1 
defaultThese can be inadequate. TWNW sees the impact of devolving a Single Local Growth Fund to Local Transport Bodies (LTBs) being beneficial overall but only if its transport element is ring fenced and if
default Local Transport Bodies are given the ability to 
defaultvire
default funds between capital and revenue. This is doubly important if the present Integrated Transport Block Grant is to be administered by LTBs.
default7. How can local authorities attract greater investment from thdefaulte private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure? What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?default defaultHow clear are the lines of accountability for local decision making on transport expenditure?default7.1 
defaultThere are
default encouraging signs of local authorities beginning to attract transport investment but TWNW would 
defaultemphasise 
defaultthat Local Transport Authorities, rather than appointed bodies such as LEPs, should be the accounting bodies. 
default&#xa0;
default7.2 
defaultWhilst Greater Manchester Combine
defaultd Authority is a model for others to follow, it should also be noted that CAs must additionally resource other economic strategies which may or may not impinge on their transport remit.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default8.1 
defaultOverall the devolution to local level of much of 
defaultthe expenditure incurred by local transport is welcomed
default.
default However t
defaulthe mechanisms for doing so are over complex 
defaultand there is a real danger of too much bureaucracy. It is probably
default 
default 
defaultfortunate that 
defaultEPBs have largely failed to materialise but 
defaultthe relationships 
defaultb
defaultetween 
defaultLEPs, CAs
default,
default LTBs 
defaultand LTAs  
defaultare 
defaultcomplex and 
defaultdo not help the cause of devolution. 
default&#xa0;
default8.2 
defaultEfforts will need to be made to repair the 
defaultdepleted skills basedefault of staff administering public transport and a more co-operative 
defaultmodus operandi
default will be required.
default&#xa0;
default8.3 
defaultShould you wish TWNW to expand on this response, either in writing or verbally, we are prepared to do so.
default&#xa0;
default8.4 
defaultThank 
defaultyou for the opportunity to respond
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 20
default13
default default&#xa0;
default Or where CAs not yet established, appropriate groupings of Local / integrated Transport Authorities
default 
defaultRoyal Commission on Local Government
default Redcliff Maud 1966; 
defaultTransport Act 1968
default; 
defaultPt 5 of Local Transport Act 2008
default;
default No stone unturned / City Deals  
defaultHesletine 
default2013
default respectively Labour (2008) and Coalition (2011)
default 
defaultTime for a new Localism
default Centre for Cities May 2013
default up to a maximum of 50% of its membership
default The Association of Greater Manchester Authorities (AGMA), the first CA in England, selected this route 
defaultin preference to the creation of a GMEPB 
default LEPs are having passed to them some of the previous Regional Development Agency’s functions, including the prioritisation of expenditure on major transport schemes,
default 
defaultHow can a LEP function where there is a paral
defaultlel EPB?
default  Local Government Chronicle April 2013
default Local Government, Local Transport Authorities, Integrated Transport Authorities, Passenger Transport Authorities/Executives and Combined Authorities
default Economic Prosperity Boards and Local Enterprise Partner
defaultships
default which LEPs will disburse
default