&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from defaultCambridgeshiredefault County Councildefault (LTD0011)default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default1.1default 
defaultThe basis for devolving funds and powers to local areas is to pass greater control 
defaultover setting the vision 
defaultand delivering growth 
defaultand ensuring
default that businesses are involved in driving the economic prosperity o
defaultf their areas. 
defaultThis 
defaulti
defaults based on 
defaultLord 
defaultHeseltine's recommendations in his report ' 
defaultNo Stone unturned'
default which called for the creation of a single cash pot, which could be worth up to £49bn, bringing together dispara
defaultte funding streams from across G
defaultovernment wit
defaulthout ring fences. However the reality is that funding levels are expected to be closer to £2bn per annum. Most of this is 
defaultunderstood to be 
defaultrecycled funding for 
defaultL
defaultocal 
defaultA
defaultuthorities from transport, housing and skills budgets, including some 55% funding from Df
defaultt. However this funding is to be 
defaultunringfenced
default for LEP’s to bid 
defaultfor 
defaulton a competitive basis for a Growth Deal to help secure a share towards driving economic growth in their areas. 
default&#xa0;
default1.2default 
defaultThe rational is fully appreciated in that there needs to be greater 
defaultinvolvement of businesses in setting the vision and helping achi
defaulteve economic prosperity for local
default areas. However there needs to be a balanced approach 
defaultincluding democratically elected Members as key decision makers 
defaultto 
defaulttackling
default the 
defaultkey challenges and ensuri
defaultng that the 
defaultright conditions for growth 
defaultar
defaulte achieved and sustained into the future. 
default&#xa0;
default1.3default 
defaultThe main advantage
defaults
default of devolving funding 
defaultare
default that 
defaultit is 
defaultunringfenced
default and provides 
defaultgreater certainty over levels of funding anticipated over a longer period from 2015 -202
default1 (if the allocations announced in the summer of 2014 cover that period rather than simply 2015/16 levels only). 
defaultThi
defaults offers greater potential than cyclical funding bid rounds which are generally 
defaultfor specific Departmental deliverables over a very short per
defaultiod and require a detailed business case 
defaultup front – such as Pinch points/
default Growing Places. 
default&#xa0;
default1.4default 
defaultThis should help areas with developing a more holistic 
defaultprogramme
default and pipeline of projects focused on delivering economic benefits. The advantage being that there is 
defaultbett
defaulter potential to deal with the myriad of complex issues and challenges that need to be a
defaultddressed to create and maintain the right conditions for growth. 
default&#xa0;
default1.5default 
defaultOn disadvantages, much of the funding has 
defaultbeen top sliced from 
defaultAuthorities 
defaultbudgets
default, and not all is 
defaultunringfenced
default. 
defaultAlso LEP’s will be
default 
defaultthe key decision makers regarding the priorities for fund
defaulting for their areas
default, and 
defaultAuthorities will 
defaultnow 
defaultneed to be able to convince LEP’s regarding priorities. 
defaultTherefore i
defaultn many ways the decision maki
defaultng powers appear to be 
defaultremoved f
defaultr
defaulto
defaultm the democratically elected local 
defaultM
defaultembers. There is a greater 
defaultfocus on ‘busines
defaults’ leading on 
defaultthe priorities for their areas.
default While
default 
defaultb
defaultusiness involvement is critical in helping to inspire and innovate and 
defaultinform
default the ambitions for local areas
default, this should be
default as part 
defaultof an overall balanced approach led by 
defaultdemocratically elected Members 
defaultwith ultimate responsibility for achieving the agreed outcomes for their communities.
default&#xa0;
default1.6default 
defaultThere is also a risk 
defaultthat money will be spent on 
defaultbidding processes and 
defaultsp
defaultecific support 
defaultiniatives
default for a short period without 
defaultnecessarily addressing the 
defaultunderlying challe
defaultnges and improving the conditions for businesses to grow and thrive
default into the future
default.  
default&#xa0;
default1.7default 
defaultThe 
defaultmodel could be improved 
defaultif Governmen
defaultt made the funding available to ‘
defaultLEP area
default’s’
default, 
defaultrather than a specific body 
defaultwith local areas 
defaultdeciding 
defaultwhich 
defaultorgansiation
default was best 
defaultplaced to 
defaultlead and 
defaultmanage the funds
default as ‘Accountable Authority
default’
default, much as the LTB arrangement works
default. There are options 
defaultfor different arrangements 
defaultwhich 
defaultcould include County/ Upper Tier Boards, 
defaultLEP, 
defaultEconomic Prosperity Boards, Joint Strategic Committees or 
defaultalternatives. The key issue is th
defaultat local areas should ideally decide and deals should be based on 
defaultoutcomes 
defaultto be delivered 
defaultand funding devolved on that basis. 
defaultGovernment would still set clear criteria and conditions for allocation of funds in LEP areas su
defaultch as requiring a strong evidence base, or operating across the LEP area or having private sector involvement
default&#xa0;
default1.8default 
defaultIt will be important to enhance t
defaulthe role of 
defaultlocal Leaders/
default democratically elected members 
defaultwho 
defaultare 
defaultthe 
defaultkey decision makers mandated to deliver 
defaultfor
default their communities.
default 
defaultMost of the duty lies with the local authorities given their statutory functions around 
defaulttransport and 
defaultplanning for growth and prosperity, and 
defaultthey 
defaultare re
defaultsponsible for delivering on these 
defaultambitions
default.  
default&#xa0;
default1.9default 
defaultD
defaultevolving funding over at least a 10 year period 
defaultthrough an agreed model 
defaultto deliver agreed outcomes that best fit
default local 
defaultcircumstances
default 
defaultwould enable loca
defaultl areas to take 
defaultgreater control and 
defaultiniative
default. 
defaultThis would 
defaulten
defaultsure
default a more holistic 
defaultapproach
default 
defaultto address some o
defaultf the complexities necessary to achieve step change 
defaultor structural
default change needed in some areas
default,
default 
defaultto drive forward economic growth and achieve longer term aims rather than a focus on immediate deliverables or targets. 
default&#xa0;
default1.10default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe City Deal model is a good example 
defaultwhere in 
defaultCambridge
defaultshire
default we are 
default   
defaultseeking to agree a Gain S
defaulthare mechanism to help deliver c
default£
default500m of transport infrastructure investment to support growth and development. Through this mechanism local 
defaultpartner
defaults
default 
defaultwill
default work together through a combined authority
default and invest up front in infrastructure to encourage 
defaultbusiness growth
default. The are
defaulta
default is to 
defaultretain a share of the uplift in taxes over base to cover costs of additional investment. This type of model will enable the Leaders working with the LEP and key partners to
default invest up front in infrastructure and greatly improve conditions for businesses. Such ambitious plans a
defaultnd clarity of investment focus is
default vital for businesses to see when they
default are deciding where in the worl
defaultd to l
defaultocate or grow. 
default&#xa0;
default              
default&#xa0;
default2.1default 
defaultThere is a real lack of resources to assess, 
defaultprioritise
default and deliver local transport sche
defaultmes across all levels currently.
default&#xa0;
default2.2default 
defaultLEP’s have been set up with minimal resources and are intended to be lean bodies with a focus on achieving through thei
defaultr partners. However this means that the Authorities 
defaultdeliver many of the aims and 
defaultprovide revenue support for basic operation of the LEP. The 
defaultlack of capacity and resources 
defaultmeans in some case LEP’s are spread t
defaulthin and don’t have the resource
default or expertise to support on transport schemes. Indeed this is the role for the Local Transport Authorities to assess, 
defaultprioritise
default and deliver local transport schemes. However the difficulty is that Authorities budgets have been reduced significantly from 20
default08 levels, where both integrated transport and maintenance budgets were reduced by almost 45%. 
default&#xa0;
default2.3default 
defaultReduced budgets, particularly on the revenue side coupled with a lack of available resource funding from Government, (apart from specific 
defaultprogrammes
default like LSTF 
defaultaimed at behavioral changes which has been useful) there have not been resources to undertake early options appraisal 
defaultor 
defaultscheme development work. Therefore in most cases, Local Authorities 
defaultdon’t have a pipeline of projects and focus only on key projects th
defaultey can commit to in terms of resources 
defaultto progress critical schemes to support growth. M
defaultost m
defaultajor projects and schemes require significant 
defaultup front
default investment and ofte
defaultn over a lengthy period of time
default.
default 
defaultExamples for this area include Cambridge Science Park St
defaultation, which has been in the LTP for 
defaultyears
default, and while there was understood to be a good business case, there was never sufficient major schemes funding to progress 
defaultthe case 
defaultto delivery. Through strong local leadership and a willingness to take the risk, 
defaultCa
defaultmbridgeshire
default County Council 
defaultis progressing the case to 
defaultapproval for 
defaultde
defaultlivery. However developing the c
defaultase and designing to a detailed stage has taken some 3 years and cost 
defaultmillions
default to take it to planning 
defaultapproval 
defaultstage for Network Rail to take forward to d
defaultelivery stage. 
default&#xa0;
default2.4default 
defaultMost of the current 
defaultGovernment funding tends only to be available when schemes are at an advanced stage and for the most part have all their approvals in place. This means that schemes are unlikely to come forward unless the Local Authorit
defaulties’ have committed to progressing them. There is little funding available to test options or look for more innovative solutions, 
defaulttherefore 
defaultLocal Authorities 
defaulthave to invest significant 
defaultin terms of 
defaultoption appraisal /
defaultscheme development with little resources,
default partic
defaultularly at the early stages. The LGF offers potential in terms of 
defaultnow building up a 
defaultprogramme
default 
defaultand pipeline 
defaultfor delivery 
defaultover time to hopefully address priorities
default.
default That is provided there is agreement locally with LEP’s on priorities and funding.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3.1default 
defaultWhile a focus on the functional economic area is important, 
defaultit
default would be helpful to have a more comprehensive vision and appro
defaultach across a wider area
default. This would 
defaulthelp ensure join up on approach and priorities around improving access to markets, and fostering relationships between related industries and spreading the benefits of growth
default.
default&#xa0;
default3.2default 
defaultIdeally there needs to be a wider overview 
defaultto ensure clarity and consistency across LEP’s and LTB areas regarding the challenges and priorities. There is a risk that at the moment, particularly for the key corridors that there could be a lack of join up and investment to support addressing key aims
default.
default&#xa0;
default3.3default 
defaultSome good work was done in the past on Regional Transport Plan, and this type of overview would be particularly helpful if linked to an investment plan and join up on priorities for investment 
defaultincluding 
defaultkey 
defaultpartners 
defaultlike 
defaultDft
default, Highways Agency and Network
default Rail. This could also then ensure join up on cross boundary priorities for LTB’s and LEP’s. This would be particularly helpful for transport issues which are not related to specific geographies and with a greater focus on corridors and improving links and
default accessibility to and between key destinations to support more efficient movement of people and goods’ 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4.1default 
defaultThere is a good working relationship at the local level between the Authorities across 
defaultCambridgeshire
default and 
defaultPeterborough
default where the authorities are working closely under the Duty to cooperate particularly on planning and transport matters.
default  As part of this wo
defaultrk the authorities have agr
defaulteed their objectively assessed
default housing needs across the whole area and Members have worked together to develop a 
defaultDraft 
defaultLong Term Transport Strategy to identify the key measures and interventions needed to support growth and conti
defaultnued economic prosperity looking forward. 
default4.2default 
defaultThe Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough 
defaultShadow 
defaultLocal Transport Body has proven to be an effective and efficient body where the LEP and the Upper tier authorities have worked successfully to develop a robust and
default deliverable major schemes programme within a challenging timescale. The Body was set up to secure devolved major schemes funding in response to 
defaultDft’s
default request and systems were put in place to comply with requirements. Despite being awarded 33% less funding
default than anticipated, the LTB agreed 6 priority schemes within a challenging timescale.  
default&#xa0;
default4.3default 
defaultFurther to this, t
defaulthe LEP has 
defaultnow 
defaulttasked the LTB with developing a 
defaultprogramme
default of transport schemes to recommend to the LEP for inclusion in 
defaulttheir Strategic Economic Plan 
defaultto drive economic growth. This process is working well despite the challenging timescales. However there is some concern that while the LTB is developing a robust and deliverable 
defaultprogramme
default aimed at supporting and facilitating growth, it is up to the LEP to
default decide on priorities and funding, and the duty will still fall to the Authorities to deliver on most of the 
defaultambitions
default although they may not have the resources to do so.  
default&#xa0;
default4.4default 
defaultLooking forward
default, it is proposed to review 
defaultthe terms of reference 
defaultand remit 
defaultfor the LTB to align with the LEP and 
defaultwider role and geography.
default4.5default 
defaultO
defaultur LEP has been greatly supportive of transport as a key priority for this area and recognizes the key role this plays in everyday lives and as a key enabler of growth. Indeed our LEP is alre
defaultady providing some £50m towards supporting the delivery of the A14 improvement scheme and has agreed the 
defaultDf
defaultT
default funding previously committed to major schemes which is welcome. However there is a risk that the LEP will decide that 
defaultthey
default need to 
defaultprioritise
default other
default area
defaults
default 
defaultnow
default, without necessarily understanding that authorities won’t have resources without the LGF to progress key schemes that support and unlock growth.
default&#xa0;
default4.6default 
defaultThere is a good local working relationship between the LEP, LTB and HA, and Dft. However there is a
default lack of clarity regarding future expectations in relation to LGF, in terms of the 
defaultfuture 
defaultrole and remit of the LTB, working cross boundaries and assessment criteria for LGF. More join up in terms of clarity on expectations for key Departments would be hel
defaultpful 
defaultto ensure consistency and c
defaultertaint
defaulty regarding the
default arrangements.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default5.1default 
defaultThe funding environment is challenging particularly 
defaultgiven 
defaultthat l
defaultevels of Integrated Block and Maintenance Block funding have been reduced by some 45% already from 2008 levels. There is uncertainty over what the 
defaultproposed 
defaulttop slice of funding for the 
defaultIntegra
defaultted B
defaultlock into the Single Local Growth
default Fund pot will mean for future t
defaultransport funding from 2015 onwards. In addition, 
defaultDft
default has made it clear that there is unlikely to be any additional funding for 
defaultlocal 
defaulttransport beyond the formula grant and LGF funding. 
default5.2default 
defaultLEP 
defaultrepresentatives have
default 
defaultworked closely with the LTB to agree
default 
defaultthe current priority 
defaultmajor schemes 
defaultand 
defaultfunding 
defaultallocations and this commitment has been agreed. However the reality is that 
defaultcurrent funding levels for major schemes are not sufficient to help de
defaultliver on the priority schemes and although we are hopeful, there is a lack of clarity that 
defaultthe levels of funding necessary 
defaultwill be secured through the Growth Deal
default.
default5.3default 
defaultLTB’s were set up to secure devolved major schemes funding
default from 
defaultDfT
default.
default A
defaultlthough 
defaultDft
default confirmed there 
defaultis a significant increase in major schemes funding, 
defaultsome 
default33% less 
defaultmajor schemes 
defaultfunding 
defaultwas committed 
defaultto the 
defaultcurrent priority schemes than the indicative amounts set out 
defaultearlier.
default  This was 
defaultmost
default disappointing and for our area, as the Aut
defaulthorities are keen to make progress on the priority schemes
default to support continued growth
default, the authorities agreed to deliver 6 
defaultpriority 
defaultschemes. 
defaultHowever in order to 
defaultdeliver theses, some 80% of the funding is being sourced
default f
defaultr
defaulto
defaultm the local authorities, 
defaultmostly
default th
defaultrough prudential borrowing. In addition there was little or no money available for scheme development or business case development so local partners have had to take on thos
defaulte costs. In ou
defaultr case, the LEP has been most supportive and stepped in to cover the 
defaultcosts of independent scrutiny of schemes
default which was an additional 
defaultDft
default requirement.
default 
default5.4default 
defaultWhile a major uplift in major schemes funding 
defaultis most welcome 
defaultfrom 
defaultDft
default, it isn’t clear that this funding will be available to support the delivery of major schemes as all of
default this funding is now going into the LGF. The difficulty is that the LGF is 
defaultunringfenced
default and can be spent on LEP priorities towards delivering economic benefits which can vary enormously in terms of outputs. There is also no guarantee that the LEP will see 
defaulttransport as their top priority and therefore no certainty that the funding will support priority transport projects. 
default5.5default 
defaultIn addition, LEP’s will be making decision
defaults
default on priorities for the funding without necessarily understanding the local government funding 
defaultcontext. There may be an assumption that 
defaultAuthorities
default will carry on with 
default‘
defaultbusiness as usual
default’ and fund
default schemes. However the reality 
defaultis
default that basic
default budgets have been reduced and unless 
defaultAuthoritie
defaults
default can access this LGF funding to help deliver priorities, the pro
defaultgrammes 
defaultcould well
default need to be reduced
default to match the reality of reduced funding
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default6.1default 
defaultDevolving funding to local areas from 
default2015 to 2021 is welcome
default. H
defaultowever 
defaultas the
default funding is going 
defaultthough
default the LEP, 
defaultt
defaulth
defaultis
default means that Authorities and other partners need to go 
defaultthough
default another 
defaultbeurocratic
default process to secure funding towards priorities
default, and there may not be agreement on priorities
default. This e
defaultssentially means that more time will be spent on this new process and making the case 
defaultwith less 
defaultresources 
defaultpotentially 
defaultfor delivering the outcomes and outputs. 
default&#xa0;
default6.2default 
defaultThe 
defaultdevolution of funds
default is welcome and over a longer period
default, but ideally 
defaultit should be for local
default LEP area
defaults
default to decide the best 
defaultorgansiation
default/ model for delivery
default. We see the benefit in developing a 
defaultprogramme
default to address the range of challenges to help ensure the right conditions for growth and 
defaultdelivering
default economic benefits. However, 
defaultthere are concerns that 
defaultthere is no guarantee that the LEP or indeed Government will agree the priorities for 
defaultfunding for 
defaultthis area. 
defaultThere needs to be greater recognition of the role of 
defaultdemocratically elected Members 
defaultin agreeing priorities. Members 
defaulthave a 
defaultduty to serve their local areas 
defaultand deliver key outcomes on behalf of their communities
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default7.1default 
defaultHaving an agreed long term vision for growth and economic prosperity is an important starting point. This should be linked to an investment plan with clarity on priorities and 
defaultkey outcomes anticipated over time 
defaultto 
defaultprovide greater certainty to investors regarding ambitions and expectations.
default&#xa0;
default7.2default 
defaultGood collaboration and 
defaulta joined up approach on resources to support priorities
default is also helpful in terms of supporting unlocking growth potential
default. 
defaultA
default key area which is pertinent is 
defaultCommunity Infrastructure Levy where resources could be pooled towards delivering infrastructure
default priorities. 
defaultThe funding generated by CIL doesn’t adequately cover the costs of infrastructure needed to support growth. However 
defaultb
defaulty pooling 
defaultsome 
defaultCIL
default receipts 
defaultacross a wider area, 
defaultthere is greater potential to support 
defaultthe delivery of strategic infrastructure priorities early
default. 
default&#xa0;
default7.3default 
defaultProviding local areas with greater freedoms and flexibilities, particularly in terms 
defaultof
default funding will enable areas to ta
defaultke 
defaultmore of the initiative to support the growth and prosperity of their local areas. One example that 
defaultis providing 
defaultsuccessful in 
defaultCambridgeshire
default 
defaulti
defaults the creation of a Rolling Infrastructure Fund
default whereby an 
defaultinitial £8 million o
defaultf Government funding was used to establish a rolling 
defaultfund.
default This
default funding was originally used to fund the Guided 
defaultBusway
default (£5.75 million) and to act as pump-priming funding for 
defaultAddenbrookes
default Access Road (£2.25 million) during the 2007-08 financial year. During 2008-09 the money was recovered from the Guided 
defaultBusway
default scheme a
defaultnd then 
defaultreused
default to provide front-funding for the 
defaultAddenbrookes
default Access Road, therefore resulting in all £8 million being used to support spending on this project. 
defaultThe provision of this access road
default help
defaulted
default unlock up to 4,000 new homes on the Cambridge southern 
defaultfringe 
defaultdevelopment which otherwise would have been delayed due to 
defaultcashflow
default/ recessionary impacts.
default&#xa0;
default7.4default 
defaultIn addition to this, an equity investment of £8 million 
defaultwas made to help bring forward the 
defaultdevelopment as part of the Rolling Fund. 
defaultT
defaulthese investments will 
defaultno
defaultw 
defaultrepay with interest, or an equity return, and the funds will then be available for investments to support housing growth across Cambridgeshire in the future. 
default&#xa0;default8.1default 
defaultCurrently the lines of accountability are clear for local decision making on transport expenditure. Most funding for transport is allocated to the Local Transport Authorities through either the Integrated Transport Block or Maintenance Block by formula, 
defaultwith some 
defaultperiodic 
defaultcompetitive bids for areas like 
defaultPinchpioints
default, Growing Places, LSTF and BBAF.
default&#xa0;
default8.2default 
defaultIn 
defaultCambridgeshire
default funding is then allocated towards the range of requirements identified in the Area Transport Strategies. These have been developed working wi
defaultth County and Local District Members and clarify the policy objectives and identify the key measures and interventions needed to address issues and support growth. This process works successfully and well, and S106 funding is also collected towards mitigat
defaulting the impacts of growth and supports the aims
default of the strategies
default.  
default&#xa0;
default8.3default 
defaultLooking forward, from 2015, while the formula grant element will remain with the Local Transport Authorities
default, the amount of funding is being top sliced and
default there is less certainty regard
defaulting arrangements for local decision making on transport expenditure
default for this and the major schemes funding
default. 
default While LTB’s have been set up to receive the devolved funding, this will now be administered by the LEP’s through the single pot. However the assess
defaultment criteria and decision making processes are unclear. The other issue is that democratically elected Members are not necessarily the decision makers as the LEP’s are primarily business led
default, and the funding will support the LEP’s priorities
default. This is a co
defaultncern 
defaultas 
defaultthere may not be agreement on funding for priorities which could impact 
defaulton the potential for areas to address the key challenges in terms of transport and create the right conditions for growth.  
default&#xa0;
default8.4default 
defaultMore consideration needs to be given the 
defaultimportant role of the LTB in terms of decision making on transport funding. The LTB’s have been set up with clear lines of accountability, and assurance framework
defaults
default setting out 
defaultclear assessment and appraisal criteria to ensure value for money and democratic
default accountability. In the Greater Cambridge Greater Peterborough area discussions are taking place about aligning the LTB to better fit the LEP geography and wider remit regarding transport as there is recognition of the important role of this body in terms 
defaultof supporting the LEP and recommending to the LEP a robust and deliverable 
defaultprogramme
default that addresses the challenges and delivers economic benefits.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default