&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultChiCycledefault (LTD0012)default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1) What is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local level defaultdecision-making on transport expenditure? What are the advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?default&#xa0;defaultDecisions about transport infrastructure hav
defaulte
default been devolved to the County Local Committees.  They are allowed to pro
defaultgress 3 Traffic Regulation Orders a year.  They cover a large area and having such a limit put on their decisions means that a lot of time is spent on deciding which 3 schemes will be progressed.  Inevitably this means that a huge number of schemes get on 
defaultthe list but never actually get done.  People are asked to provide support for their scheme and hand in petitions.  Even if you hand in a petition there is no guarantee that the scheme will go ahead
default – 
defaulteg
default petition for a crossing at Walnut Tree Pub in 
defaultNorth 
defaultMundham
default which has 
defaultresulted in
default a £10,000 study but no crossing for the children to get to the local school on foot
default.  The members on the County Local Committee 
defaultseem aware of promoting sustainable travel but
default the need to “keep traffic flowing” and “increase ca
defaultpacity” are higher up the political agenda.  Cycle paths for leisure are promoted over and above schemes on busy junctions or 
defaultgyratories
default or arterials for utility cycling.  Sustainable travel does not have a proper budget but is dependent on S106 funding – 
defaultso there is no way of getting repairs to cycle paths or new facilities progressed.  A new bridge 
defaultfor pedestrians and cyclists 
defaultwas put in over the railway in 
defaultChichester
default.  When this was planned the councillors’ attention was brought to the fact that cargo tr
defaultikes and trailers would have to use this bridge.  The turns are too tight for these vehicles and a row of bollards have been put in on the road to prevent cars from parking near the 
defaultbridge but they are too close together and now cargo trikes and trailers c
defaultannot turn off the road
default to get to the crossing
default!
default To change this, this will have to be put on a list to be put to the CLC meeting and it w
defaultill have to bid for S106 monies
default.  It is very unlikely that this will be prioritized over other schemes in 
defaultSelsey
default, 
defaultChiche
defaultster
default, The Bourne and 
defaultTangmere
default.  Road schemes are prioritized that often do not include an element for cycling.  
default&#xa0;
defaultUndoubtedly it is important that local bodies make decisions about what transport schemes ought to be progressed.  However if the local body i
defaults not made up of transport professionals, is influenced by political concerns above all, and has a huge list of projects to 
defaultchose
default from and finally is only able to 
defaultchose
default 3 a year, it is not surprising that this approach does not bring 
defaultm
defaultany advantages for th
defaulte residents.  A better model would have better funding – not just chasing S106 monies, would have clear guidelines so as to promote sustainable travel as a proper means of transport, rather than as the Cinderella of Motor transport.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2)default defaultDo local bodies (including local authorities, local enterprise partnerships, passenger transport executives, integrated transport authorities and local defaulttransport boards) have the capacity to assess, defaultprioritisedefault and deliver local transport schemes? What would the optimum delivery body look like?default&#xa0;
defaultThe structure we have at the moment means that a lot of plans are produced but local transport schemes for cycli
defaultng are not being delivered.  There is no mechanism to ensure that what 
defaultChichester
default District Council says is necessary to promote sustainable travel is carried out. There have been cuts to funding to local government, changes of staff, and there is no dedica
defaultted cycling budget or officer or proper strategy.  The well-intentioned words in the plans ar
defaulte not translated to proper schemes
default and these are not progressed through the slow, complicated and restrictive CLC system.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe optimum delivery body would 
defaultbe more 
defaulttransparent – it is very difficult to find anything out in 
defaultChichester
default.  Different areas/ schemes would have named officers attached to them who could follow projects through.  A transport body is needed for individual areas that is allowed to develop and w
defaultork through a vision with a proper budget, proper input from people concerned to bring about a sense of place and safer, people-friendly places, rather than traffic engineers interested 
defaultprimarily 
defaultin traffic flow and increasing traffic volume.  We must work
default towards different priorities in 2014.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is no evidence that anyone is working to implement the outlines of LTP3.  L
defaultocal bodies 
defaultsuch as the CLC committees 
defaultdo not have the capacity to assess, 
defaultprioritise
default and deliver local transport schemes.
default&#xa0;
default3) What is defaultthe best way of dealing with major transport schemes that cross local authority boundaries or have wider regional impact?default&#xa0;defaultI am not aware of the working together of borough or district councils across boundaries
default at the moment.
default  There is a lot of competitio
defaultn for money between areas and schemes and for planning and delivery to work the approval of such schemes needs to be with a higher body that has an overall vision for the whole area.  Transport planning seems to be taken away from any groups that wish to p
defaultromote sustainable travel throughout the county
default and devolved to county local committees that are just fighting their own little corners and not aware of the need to produce a cohesive network of safe, people-friendly streets
default.
default  We have a lot of issues in 
defaultCh
defaultichester
default with the danger on the A27 to pedestrians.  Many people have been killed on the road which cuts through 
defaultChichester
default’s
default urban areas.  
defaultNoone
default is willing to look into reducing the speed – as has been done outside 
defaultWorthing
default and Arundel (40mph).  We still 
defaulthave 70mph and we are planning yet more houses on brownfield sites on the other side of the A27 to the main urban area.  The Highways Agency do not want to hear from people who ask for the speed to be reduced.  Who is the Highways Agency
default 
defaultaccountable to? Th
defaultis is a body that operates across local authority boundaries and yet 
defaultit seems very difficult to 
defaulthold it accountable for its decisions.
default 
default&#xa0;
default4)default defaultHow effectively do local bodies work with each other and with Government departments and national transport agenciesdefault?defaultWe know that there are meetings between agencies but we have little evidence of changes coming about.  We have asked for the speed on the A27 which effectively cuts through residential areas in the city to be reduced.  There is little evidence that peopl
defaulte’s wishes are taken into account or any changes carried through despite the large number of deaths on this road.  
defaultNoone
default seems to know who the Highways Agency is accountable to and thus 
defaultnoone
default knows who to influence or how this change can be brought about.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe know that the district and county councils work together to produce plans.  
defaultChichester
default District Council is having to plan for a large number of extra houses and so they work with WSCC planners to work out how the roads should be improved.  They produce 
defaulthugely detailed plans to show how each roundabout on the A27 should be improved and updated to keep the traffic flowing.  However the plans only contain 
default“
defaultarrows of connectivity
default”
default to show where the new 
defaultcyclepaths
default should go in.  They do not show any new cycle
default paths or cy
defaultcle infrastructure at all.  The councils
default work together well on things they prioritize, but things that are less important to them 
defaulteg
default cycle paths are only mentioned vaguely and no proper detail is given to carry out any real changes.
default&#xa0;default5) Do the defaultcurrent funding streams for major local transport schemes meet the needs of local authorities? How do current funding streams compare with previous arrangements?defaultWSCC has had to make huge numbers of cuts and this 
defaultreason 
defaultis given for the lack of schemes bei
defaultng brought forward for our roads and for sustainable travel too.  As the roads 
defaulthave 
defaultdeteriorate
defaultd
default over the past few winters, WSCC is fighting a losing battle, with more and more complaints being brought by motorists.  The motorists lobby is obviously very s
defaulttrong so sustainable travel schemes are not prioritized.  
defaultChichester
default and Horsham won some LSTF funding – however all the other towns and cities in the county got no money at all.  The funding will not allow a proper job to be done on one of our 
defaultgyratories
default 
default– instead cyclists are offered some more shared pavements, and the chance to use 3 toucan crossings to get round a gyratory.  This scheme is being rushed through so that the deadline for spending is not missed and the end result will 
defaultnot 
defaultproduce that visio
defaultn of proper, safe, segregated paths as in Holland
default – but it is a sad compromise just offering those people who are scared of cycling round a busy gyratory the chance to 
defaultwait at
default 3 toucan crossings
default. Most cyclists will still use the road as being far quicker a
defaultnd then they will be shouted at for not being on the cycle path.  
defaultThe source of danger for cyclists on the junction will not be removed.  
defaultThe whole area will not be revamped as a people-friendly instead of a traffic dominated place. For proper local transp
defaultort planning proper funding must be provided instead of a few drops
default here and there
default.
default  The County cannot plan properly for cycling as it does not put any monies aside for this,  if it is using S106 monies, it has conflicting pulls on this from lots of other 
defaultinterest groups, funding from central government has to be bid for and does not get spread evenly around areas.  Apparently there was a fund earlier in 2013 called Cycling Ambition Fund, which seems to have passed us by.  
defaultThis is all piecemeal funding whic
defaulth does not produce satisfactory results for anyone.  So much time is spent on deciding how to deploy scarce resources and the council says it has to save £140 million so there is not much likelihood of proper planning and proper improvements to roads, or a
defaultny expenditure on the sustainable infrastructure we so badly need.
default Sustainable infrastructure will only be put in when it can bid for
default S106 monies when enough houses have been built by new developers. 
default So if we don’t build more houses, we won’t get any cycling infrastructure!
default&#xa0;
default6) What impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introduction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?defaultI have not heard of this so cannot comme
defaultnt.
default My concern with any procedures that are set up is that inevitably 
defaultcouncil
defaultl
defaultors
default, who are politicians, want to do “popular” things as they want to be re-elected.  Therefore if decisions are left entirely to elected representatives to decide how money is s
defaultpent, only certain 
defaultpolitical 
defaultviewpoints would 
defaultfavour
default money being spent on proper cycle infrastructure.  There is no doubt that everyone in our different layers of council knows that they need to tick the boxes about sustainable travel, but when it comes to
default how the money is spent, it is considered more important to please the motorist and to increase traffic flow and capacity.  To get a body to actually put proper cycling infrastructure on the list for funding you either have to change the view of the vocal 
defaultmajority or use some of the opinions of the sustainability forums and committees these councils 
defaultundoubtedly have.  There is a lot of support for cycle infrastructure as most people you speak to would like to cycle safely around our small city, it is just t
defaulthat we need to prove this to the 
defaultcouncil
defaultl
defaultors
default (via petitions 
defaultetc
default) as otherwise nothing will get done, whatever body or funding structure is introduced.  
defaultWe fear that the Single Local Growth Fund 
defaultwill wipe out any consideration of sustainable transport sche
defaultmes both big and small.   That is because it is designed to promote jobs supported by road building.  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default7) How can local authorities attract greater investment from the private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure? Whadefaultt scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?defaultLocal authorities have the responsibility of funding transport infrastructure and so it is unlikely that private investors will volunteer for this.  
defaultI have heard that individual streets have been
default asked to finance their own 20mph signs which I think is wrong.  In such cases only richer people who can afford such luxuries could finance such safety measure
defaults for their streets
default.  The children of the poorer families would not be able to pay for their sig
defaultns, although it is well known that there are more collisions in poorer areas.  For this reason, I do not believe that such things should be outsourced from the state.  I believe that the Highways Authorities bear responsibility for maintaining the roads, s
defaultetting speed limits 
defaultetc
default and they should be adequately financed by central government to allow this happen.  At the moment local councils are put under such pressure, that they are barely able to fulfil their statutory obligations, so looking into changing 
defaultspeed limits to ensure the safety of pedestrians and cyclists falls to the lottery of S106 funding and the perseverance of local campaigners.  The local council does not have enough money available to put into funding any cycling related infrastructure
default at 
defaultall 
default– although it should do so, to enable people to travel in safety around the area, and to encourage more sustainable travel for health and environmental reasons.  
default8) defaultHow clear are the lines of accountability for local decision making on transport expendefaultditure?defaultThere are no lines of accountability.  
defaultThe impression the average person on the street has is that 
defaultWSCC and CDC write whatever they like in their plans, and do whatever they like without paying heed to the views of the ordinary citizen.  Consultati
defaultons are carried out but the voices of the normal residents 
defaultoften appear to be 
defaultblatantly ignored
default - some people have even claimed that the comments to the consultations are not even read
default.  The councils exert their decision 
defaultmaking without there being to our
default k
defaultnowledge any means of 
defaultquestioning decisions or bringing anyone to account for their decisions.  The councillors exert unrestrained influence over all decisions and all policy documents and all expenditure. There is no means of redress for any individual or
default group except the ballot box.
default  If there are, unknown to us
default, lines of accountability for lo
defaultcal decision making, we 
defaulthave yet to discover them after 4 years of continual campaigning in this city.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default