&#xa0;
defaultDIS 15defaultWdefaultritten evidence submitted by the National Association of defaultService Providers in Physical RehabilitationdefaultExecutive summary  : default1.NASPIRdefault  and its role in  disability in Nepaldefault&#xa0;defaultThe 
defaultNational Association of Service Providers in Nepal (
defaultNASPIR) was established in 2010 in Kathmandu. It
default is a non-profitable, non-politi
defaultcal umbrella organization of Nepali
default service providers involved in
default the provision of 
default physical rehabilitation
default services
default. 
defaultNASPIR members represent 12 among the main 
default service providers in the country
default,  from all 5 development regions of Nepal. The m
defaultembers under this association a
defaultre
default represent
defaulted
default by
default the president 
default Ashok 
defaultBikram
default 
defaultJairu
default 
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultVision
default:
default the vision of NASPIR 
defaultis improved access to quality and equitable  rehabilitation services for the people of Nepal.
defaultStrategy
default: 
defaultIn order to strengthen the rehabilitation  sector
default 
default, 
defaultNASPIR 
defaultadvocates for  a bigger institutional engagement from the government of Nepal, promotes research and data collection on disability, and facilitates knowledge transfer  among rehabilitation providers on technical and organizational aspects ( quality assurance process, capacity building of staff).
defaultNASPIR works in cooperation with the government of Nepal and international organizations working in the field of disability and physical rehabilitation .
default&#xa0;
defaultThe availability of rehabilitation services is very recent in Nepal. Ten years ago there was no capacity to deliver specific services to persons with disabilities; however, there were several  local non-profit organizations supporting  the most marginalized groups in their  communities, such as underserved and poor groups, certain castes, and persons with disabilities.
default&#xa0;
defaultThanks to the support of international agencies, those local 
defaultorganisations
default that are now represented by NASPIR could develop specific capacities and infrastructures 
defaultsuch as workshops for prosthesis and orthotics, but also developed community based rehabilitation (CBR) 
defaultprogrammes
default to reach out the most remote communities.
default&#xa0;
defaultThose organizations and NASPIR  today continue  advocating for an inclusive society, where barriers in access to mainstream services are eliminated and specific services are available to any person in need. Thanks to its  mandate and the experience gained  in different regions of the country , NASPIR  is able  to contribute to the debate on disability and provide concrete  recommendations for the inclusion of persons with disabilities in low-income settings to the government of the UK. 
default&#xa0;default 2.defaultTdefaulthe role of rehabilitation as a pre-requisite for inclusiondefault&#xa0;defaultAs
default highlighted in the 
defaultWHO and World Bank World Report on Disability (2010), persons 
default with disabilities
default 
defaultface widespread barriers in accessing services (health, education, employment, transport as well as information). These include inadequate policies and standards, negative attitudes, lack of service provision, inadequate funding, lack of accessibility, inadequate information and communication and lack of participation in decisions that directly affect their lives.
default The link between poverty and disability has also been underlined: persons 
default with disabilities have worse hea
defaultlth and socioeconomic outcomes  than persons without disabilities. The more disadvantaged are usually the more severely impaired, who have very low mobility and very poor access to information and participation in decision making.
default&#xa0;
defaultRehabilitation 
defaultis 
defaulta 
defaultset of measures that 
default 
defaultassist individuals who experience
default,
default or are likely to experience
default,
default disability to achieve and maintain optimal functioning in interaction with their environment.
default 
defaultRehabilitation is a process tailored on the person, it requires a multi-disciplinary approach which usually  includes both specialized, center-based services and community-based services.
defaultBy improving 
default mobility
default through devices and exercise, p
defaultromoting function
default, removing environmental barriers and i
defaultncreasing confidence 
defaultand
default self esteem
default, physical rehabilitation is  often a pre-requisite for inclusion. 
default&#xa0;
defaultPhysical rehabilitation, like other specific services such as vocational trainings and support services, can play an important role not only in finding personalized 
defaultsolutions, 
defaultbut also –if continuum  is present with other kinds of services- intervene early and reduce com 
default. Habilitation and rehabilitation services  are among the services that should be available with no barriers to persons with disabilities (UNCRPD, art 20 and 26).
default&#xa0;default3.defaultEvidence on disability and rehabilitation needsdefault in Nepal.default&#xa0;defaultNepal, which has a population of nearly 30 million people, went through a 10-year civil war in which some 15,000 people were killed and many others were injured and disabled. This led to an increased need for rehabilitation services, a need that was aggravated by the reduced capacity of the health system to meet normal health needs. However, conflict is not the only factor that influences the need for physical rehabilitation services, but also growing and ageing populations, increasing prevalence of chronic conditions (such as stroke and diabetes), road traffic accidents, etc., as well as other causes often related to poverty and malnutrition. According to 
defaultWHO 
defaultestimates , a country with a population of Nepal’s size could have some 450,000 persons who could need different types of rehabilitation (including physical rehabilitation), and some 150,000 persons (0.5 % of the population) could need a prosthesis or 
defaultorthosis
default. 
default. To cover the total need 
defaultfor
default prostheses and 
defaulto
defaultrthoses
default, approximately 50,000 individuals could need 
defaultassistance 
default every year.
default 
defaultAt present, however, only a small portion (probably less than 4 % per year) of those persons who could potentially need prosthetic and orthotic rehabilitation, benefit from such services in Nepal.
default&#xa0;
defaultEven though the country ratified the UNCRPD in 2010, little progress has been 
defaultmade
default in defining a comprehensive s
defaulttrategy on disability including all relevant sectors 
default.
default 
defaultRehabilitation falls u
defaultnder Ministry of Social Welfare, and 
default disabili
defaultty remains an object of charity. R
defaultehabilitation must be further integrated into the health system for better early detection (safe motherhood), stimulation (early childhood), screening, referral, community based care, 
defaultand 
defaultbasic rehabi
defaultlitation services at the primary health care level.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 12 physical rehabilitation centers (PRCs) gathered under NASPIR are today the major providers of services in the country. W
defaultithout them, very few persons would have access to such services.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe main objectives today are to make these services more
default equitabledefault and 
defaultaccessible  default, in order to reach the most vulnerable groups of the population, but also to make them more autonomous from external support and move  towards a 
defaultsustainabledefault system of services.
default&#xa0;
default1)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultGood pract
defaultices for improved accessibility: service models
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is widely acknowledged that unmet needs are huge and coverage is not sufficient. Several strategies are utilized by the PRCs in the country in order to increase accessibility of services.
default&#xa0;
default-
defaultlinks with CBR programs.default Community Disability Workers (CDWs) assure detection and follow up of cases that need specific services at the PRCs. This is important not only because  CDWs are in the community and can easily get access to local decision makers and peer networks for support; but also because they ensure long term follow up for cases that usually are complex . 
defaultOne of the limits of CBR services is the fact that despite being officially integrated into the scope of the Ministry of Social Welfare and some  funds being allocated, programs are not comprehensive and focus only on certain components ( livelihood, rather than empowerment) with limited 
defaultinpact
default on the inclusion of persons with disabilities.
default&#xa0;
default-
defaultMobile teamsdefault: this  is a widespread model in Nepal given the proportion of isolated communities and the limited number of health facilities. Rehabilitation mobile camps are organized periodically by PRCs and allow the provision of rehabilitation services in areas that are highly underserved. Along the years, several modifications have been made to increase the quality and the effectiveness of such a service model. 
defaultIt has been noticed that mobile camps serve the  double purpose of both providing specific services but also raising awareness among the community and the health system of the need for  such services. In some cases, it led certain communities at the district level to make clear demands for physiotherapy services at the local hospital, with technical back up of the PRCs for the most complex cases.
default&#xa0;
default2)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultGood practices for improved sustainability
default&#xa0;
defaultDevelopment of a  
defaultRdefaultehabilitation defaultMdefaultanagement defaultSdefaultystemdefault (RMS)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultRMS is a systematic approach to the evaluation and planning 
defaultof 
defaultphysical rehabilitation facilities in core management areas identified through literature review: service users, service outputs, internal management, staff, finances
default. RMS
default  includes the evaluation of  quality assurance mechanisms against international standards
default . It was introduced in 2012 to  5 PRCs 
default which were  exposed to it for the first time. 
defaultThanks to a participatory analysis by the staff of PRCs, areas of weakness were identified and steps were taken to improve certain standards. 
defaultHowever, dimensions such as human resources management  and professional performance 
defaultare 
defaulthighly depend
defaultent
default on environmental /national arrangements ( policies and laws on staff, academic requirements for professionals, training capacities ) that are currently far 
defaultfrom being
default defined and endorsed on a large scale. In other words, RMS is contributing to the improvement of  local partners’ governance mechanism
defaults
default -includ
defaulting
default quality control- by introducing for the first time a sustainable instrument, yet structural weaknesses at the national level currently represent a barrier for  a more comprehensive regulation of services.
default&#xa0;
defaultTechnical sustainability:default 
defaultIndividual  staff assessments are regularly done by senior
default  rehabilitation staff ( one physiotherapist 
defaultand one 
defaultspecialist in 
defaultP
defaultrosthetics and Orthotics
default)
default. These are 
default rigorous evaluations of clinical and professional skills 
defaultagainst 
defaulta common check list of knowledge, skills and attitudes based on job profiles 
default.
defaultOnce the evaluations are done, an individualized plan is designed to address the weaknesses and respond to the demand of the staff themselves. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are limitations in this approach of course, since professional regulation, accreditation and continuous professional development mechanisms are not in place in Nepal, except for 
defaultPTs
default to some extent. It is also important to mention that policies on human resources for the rehabilitation sector don’t exist in the country. 
defaultIt is important to remember that  even  at the global level, shared standards and guidelines of reference  for the sector are missing
default,
default and only recently WHO urged the development of such guidelines and established an action plan for  the production of evidence and recommendations  based on the 6 blocks of health system strengthening. This should allow rehabilitation stakeholders worldwide to 
defaultanswer to questions such as: 
defaultwhat are the requirements of a rehabilitation service? Which standards
default should be used
default? W
defaulthat
default means and w
defaulthat
default resources are needed to respond to the disability burden in  each country ?
default&#xa0;defaultFinancial sustainabilitydefaultPhysical rehabilitation centers  receive funds from international donors, and only  limited funding   from the government. The latter is on a medium term-basis, not on comprehensive budgeting strategies.
defaultAnother source of funding   is the mobilization of local resources ( Ministry of Local Development) based on quotas for marginalized groups , but this funding is  of course limited. Attempts to develop  cost-recovery systems are  in place  and are  based on vulnerability criteria of clients (with vulnerable people  eligible for free services) , but  this only partially covers  the costs of PRCs.
default&#xa0;
defaultNASPIR is advocating at the central level to increase engagement of the government in allocating resources for  PRCs. However, this will require several intermediate steps such as a more detailed analysis of health and rehabilitation needs ( still unclear) , long-term planning for human resources, and the development of links between those centers and the health system.
default&#xa0;
default4.defaultReccommendations for actiondefault 
defaultGiven the burden of disease in the country, rehabilitation should be considered among public health strategies to reduce such burden and improve the quality of life of people.
defaultIn practice, this would mean having a 
defaulthealth system strengthening approach default: provide training to all health staff on disability; increase referral systems; carefully plan to train and deploy human resources for rehabilitation  according to the health priorities.
defaultThe overall aim should be to have a 
defaultsector development approachdefault with long term plans .
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default