&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultGuide Dogs default(LTD0014)default&#xa0;default1.1 
defaultP
defaultublic transport is essential in allowing disabled people to live independent and active lives. Guide Dogs is an organisation dedicated to improving the independent mobility of blind and partially sighted people and, as such, we have considerable experience
default 
defaultin this area 
defaultand a body of evidence of the experiences of this group in using transport. 
default&#xa0;
default1.2 
defaultGuide Dogs campaigns on transport issues which affect our service users both locally and nationally. In particular we campaign for buses to be made accessible t
defaulto blind and partially sighted people through the fitting of audio-visual 
default(AV) 
defaultannouncements and for streets to be accessibly 
defaultdesigned 
defaultand 
defaultkept 
defaultfree from clutter. Guide Dogs has concerns about 
defaulthow 
defaultchanges in 
defaultlocal transport 
defaultdecision-making structures will a
defaultffect 
defaultthese 
defaultaccessibility
default issues
default.  
default&#xa0;
default1.3 
defaultIn our capacity as a mobility organisation
default, we have a particular interest in
default:
defaultOur response is therefore
default focused on
default the Committee’s questions 
defaultwhich relate
default to these areas.
default&#xa0;default2 defaultWhat is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local defaultlevel decision defaultmaking on transport expenditure? What are defaultthe advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?default2.1 
defaultDevolution and localism are desirable objective
defaults
default inasmuch as they provide greater flexibility to meet the needs of the local population.
default However, there is a risk th
defaultat the needs of minority groups within these local populations will not be taken into account
default in 
defaultfunding 
defaultdecisions
default. D
defaultevolution has to be in the context of prevailing national standards for the accessibility of vehicles, infrastructure and networks. 
default&#xa0;
default2.2 
defaultI
defaultn the real world, travel is not confined by local authority 
defaultor LEP 
defaultboundaries and people with sight loss need to have the confidence that certain accessibility standards will be upheld throughout their journey. 
defaultA door-to-door
default journey is only as ac
defaultcessible 
defaultas its weakest link. This can be illustrated 
defaultthrough the current situation on 
defaultAV announcements: though trains are equipped with AV technology, this brings no benefit to a blind person if their bus to the station is not. If 
defaultthey 
defaultcannot be confident of safel
defaulty travelling to the station, then the whole journey becomes 
defaulteffectively 
defaultinaccessible.  
default&#xa0;
default2.3 Guide Dogs concern is that u
defaultnless national standards are imposed, 
defaulti.e.
default 
defaulta requirement for AV
default a
defaultnnouncements on all buses across the UK, this type of accessibility im
defaultprovement may become 
defaultthe sort of 'minor' issue which would 
defaultbe
default scrimped and saved on 
defaultby a local body 
defaultat the last minute to avoid budget over-runs.
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.4 
defaultA recent report by the National Audit Office on Funding and Structures for Local Economic Growth showed 
defaultthat 
defaultthere is no plan to measure outcomes or evaluate performance comparably across different local growth progress. It also noted that 
defaultLEPs were mak
defaulting progress at different rates:
default 
default“Some partnerships continue to face significant capacity issues, a factor
default exacerbated by the recent step change in the demands placed upon them through introducing the Growth Deals and new responsibilities for EU structural funds.”
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.5 
defaultTh
defaultese regional differences between LEPs will result in patchwork provision of transport, 
defaultincluding accessibility improvements, reducing the ability of blind and partially sighted people to travel across th
defaulte country safely and with confidence
default. 
default&#xa0;default3.0 defaultWhat impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introductiodefaultn of the Single Local Growth Fund have?default3.1 
defaultGuide Dogs is concerned that the introduction of the Single Local Growth Fund 
defaultcould result in less funding for transport projects overall. Our understanding is that the Department for Transport is the 
defaultbiggest
default dep
defaultartmental
default 
defaultcontributor to the 
defaultSingle Local Growth Fund – contributing £1.9bn of funding. Most relevant to Guide Dogs is that 
default£100m of 
defaultthis is from the 
defaultLocal 
defaultSustainable Transport Fund
default, a fund
default 
defaultfor smaller projects 
defaultwhich could
default, for example,
default be used to equip b
defaultuses with AV. The money paid by the DfT into the 
defaultSingle Local Growth 
defaultFund is not ring-fenced so it is possible that some of the DfT’s
default money
default could be
default used for other local projects unrelated to transport.
default&#xa0;default4.0 defaultHow clear are the lines of accountability for defaultlocal decision making on transport expenditure?default4.1 
defaultT
defaulthe establishment of the £2b
defaultn Single Local Growth F
defaultu
defaultnd and the transfer of decision 
defaultmaking in respect of this fund to 
defaultLEPs 
defaultwill increase the
default part that LEPs
default 
defaultplay 
defaultin taking local transport decisions. Guide 
defaultDogs is concerned about the accountability of LEPs and their obligations with regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty.
default 
defaultThe 
defaultPublic Sector Equality Duty
default empowers 
defaultdifferent transport u
defaultsers
default, and particularly disabled p
defaulteople,
default 
defaultto engage 
defaultin the decision-making 
defaultprocess, creating better transport solutions for all sections of society.
default&#xa0;
default4.2
default 
defaultL
defaultocal authorities, Passenger Transport Executive
defaults and Integrated Transport Authorities come directly within the remit of the Equality Act 2010,
default through listing in Schedule 19. T
defaulthe status of
default L
defaultocal 
defaultT
defaultransport 
defaultB
defaultodie
defaults
default and 
defaultLEPs 
defaultis far less clear. 
defaultT
defaulthe
defaultse bodies
default 
defaultcarry
default out public functions 
defaultand so should be 
defaultsubject to the Act, 
defaultbut this 
defaulthas not been supported by clear guidance to this effect. It is concerning that the only easily 
defaultaccessible guidance 
defaultis contained in the Supplementary Guidance to Local Enterprise Partnerships on the Development and Delivery of European Structural 
defaultand Investment Funds 
defaultStrategies. This document
default reminds LEPs they need to “
defaultfamiliarise themselves
default”
default with th
defaulte Public Sector Equality Duty as they will be advising Managing Authorities (which are bound by these 
defaultduties) on how best to exercise
default public functions. 
defaultThis implies that LEPs do not themselves have to have regard to the Public Sector Equality Duty.
default&#xa0;
default4.3
default 
defaultTh
defaultere are further concerns about accountability. In a recent article in Transport XTra, Professor Tony Travers of the London School of Economics
default wrote,
default “LEPs and local transport bodies are not local government. At the margin they are less legitimate than loc
defaultal government, pure and simple”.   
defaultFurther concerns come from the recent National Audit Office report which stated: 
default‘Locally, it is not clear that the government has achieved its objective to “increase democratic accountability and transparency, and ensu
defaultre that public expenditure is more responsive to the need
defaults of local business and people” ’
default 
default&#xa0;
default4.4
default 
defaultFurthermore, the report states 
default‘
defaultLocal Enterprise Partnerships are not subject to the same transparency requirements as local authorities
default’
default. Not only is it unclear whether LEPs have to abide by the same equality requirements as local authorities but 
defaultwe are concerned that it will be more difficult for disability groups, such as Guide Dogs, to monitor the work of LEPs and hold them to account. 
defaultDevolving responsibility for large amounts of transport funding to these bodies may 
defaultresult in less transparent and 
defaultless accountable decision 
defaultmaking, which will have a negative impact upon disabled people. 
default&#xa0;
default4.5
default 
defaultLEPs 
defaultdo 
defaultincorporate a voluntary sector input,
default 
defaultbut disability is much more than just a third sector issue and it would be wrong to assume that the third sector is necessarily the best way for people with disabilities to engage. 
defaultIn summary, 
defaultwith LEPs ta
defaultking a greater role in decision 
defaultmaking, 
defaultwe want to
default see LEPs placed under a clear statutory duty to take equa
defaultlities into account in decision 
defaultmaking and to meet the same standards that apply to other public authorities in respect of consultation and engagement with people with a differing range of disabilit
defaulties, including 
defaultvisual impairment
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultwww.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/10285-001-Local-economic-growth.pdf
default