&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultStagecoach Group plcdefault (LTD0018)defaultINTRODUCTIONdefaultThis is the response by Stagecoach Group plc to the Transport Committee new inquiry call for evidence on Local Decision Making on Transport Expenditure. As rail expenditure is largely controlled through national funding, our response relates 
defaultto expenditure on local bus services.
defaultEXECUTIVE SUMMARYdefaultDEVOLUTIONdefaultAs part of its localism agenda national government has replaced regional government with Local Enterprise Partnerships, with spen
defaultding on major transport schemes to be determined by Local Transport Bodies.
defaultLocal Enterprise Partnerships are unelected bodies comprising members representing local government, public and private businesses and community groups. The boundaries of LEPs have
default been decided locally, resulting in a wide variety of size from single county council to multi council and in some cases overlapping areas. These are not aligned to Local Transport Authority and Integrated Transport Authority boundaries. It is unclear how 
defaultmembership of LEPs has been decided, but few include representatives of local bus operators or passenger representative groups. Each LEP appears to have different procedures for meetings, and in some cases there appears to be little consultation with other
default interested parties who are not members of the LEP.
default 
defaultLocal Transport Boards comprise mainly elected members of corresponding LEP areas with authority to determine spending priorities, together with LEP representatives and potentially other non-voting membe
defaultrs. LTBs are similarly not aligned to LTA or ITA areas.
default At local level Stagecoach has found it difficult to engage with LEPs and LTBs.
defaultStagecoach would wish to see greater guidance from national government to ensure that LEPs and LTBs have more balanced re
defaultpresentation of public transport interests in their membership.
defaultSPENDING PRIORITIESdefaultLocal buses are the most used form of public transport with 4.7 billion bus trips annually, serving a wide variety of purposes including travel for work, education, sh
defaultoppin
defaultg and leisure. Independent research by Greener Journeys shows that:
defaultHowever, with little or no representation on LEPs or LTBs, bus operators and passenger representat
defaultives have little opportunity to present a case for public transport expenditure on bus priority schemes. The result, as demonstrated by an analysis of LTB 
defaultscheme priorities by Campaign for Better Transport, is a predominance of road building schemes. Bus p
defaultrojects form only 7% of total planned expenditure. It may simply be the case that without any membership advocates of public transport, LEPs and LTBs overlook relatively low cost bus schemes in favour of larger 
defaultand more expensive highway 
defaultprojects.
defaultThe domi
defaultnance of road construction 
defaultr
defaultisks a return to the unsustainable “predict and provide” policies of the 
defaultprevious century
default, with associated problems of increasing congestion and pollution
default. 
defaultM
defaultajor Bus Rapid Transit schemes such as West Yorkshire, Cambridgeshire, 
defaultLuton &amp; Dunstable, North Kent and Gosport &amp; Fareham
default, and the planned Leigh-Manchester scheme
default have demonstrated the ability of local buses to provide an effective and sustainable alternative to road construction. 
defaultSuch schemes have been promoted by the local
default LTAs and ITAs. It is unclear how similar schemes might be promoted and prioritised in future under LEPs and LTBs.
defaultAs LEPs must submit their Strategic Economic Plans by March 2014 for the period 2015-2020, and few LEPs have considered major bus transport s
defaultchemes, it seems likely that few if any such schemes will become possible until at least 2021.  
default 
default 
defaultStagecoach would wish to see greater guidance from national government to ensure that LEPs and LTBs have a more balanced mix of spending projects between roa
defaultd capacity and public transport
default schemes
default.
defaultCAPITAL &amp; REVENUE EXPENDITUREdefaultThe new LEP and LTB bodies are primarily concerned with 
defaultmajor 
defaulttransport capital expenditure projects. 
defaultBy their nature such schemes tend to be large and expensive.
default In contrast, other tha
defaultn major BRT schemes, public transport capital expenditure projects such as bus priorities and bus shelters tend to be small in scale and value. Stagecoach is 
defaultconcerned that small scale public transport schemes may be overlooked in favour of “grand projects
default”.
defaultBecause they operate on the common road network, local buses are not heavily dependent on public capital expenditure, the vehicles being mainly financed by private capital. The majority of local bus se
defaultrvices are operated commercially, with around 20% of
default services requiring public sector support through competitive tendering. All services benefit from national government funded Bus Service Operators Grant, and are required to carry eligible elderly and disabled passengers free of charge for which a proport
defaultion of the average fare is paid to operators by local government.
defaultAs part of the national economic austerity measures and public expenditure cuts, BSOG was cut by 20% in 2012 and frozen in 
defaultcash
default terms until 2016. BSOG for tendered services has been transfer
defaultred from operators to local authorities, but only ring-fenced until 2016. Concession travel re-imbursement has been reduced in real terms to a level below the average cost of carriage per passenger. In addition to these factors many local authority support
defaulted services have been reduced or withdrawn due to public spending cuts. Government policy has been to protect capital spending projects at the expense of revenue spending, and this policy has a disproportionately adverse effect on local bus services. There
default does not appear to be any national measure to compare the cost benefit of capital
default expenditure projects
default with revenue expenditure projects, although there may be greater public benefit in continuing to support unprofitable but socially desirable local bus s
defaultervices rather than a new capital project.
defaultStagecoach would wish to see new guidance from national government to LEPs and LTBs to consider revenue expenditure on public transport projects on the same cost benefit terms as capital projects.
defaultStagecoach Groupdefault&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default 
default   
default&#xa0;
default