&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultSouth Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive
default (LTD0022)
default&#xa0;
defaultThis consultation response has been prepared on behalf of Sheffield City Region (SCR) Executive and South Yorkshire Passenger Transport Executive (SYPTE). The response reflects the evolving governance in SCR towards a Combined Authority and the wider conte
defaultxt of the Strategic Economic Plan (SEP), which Local Enterprise Partnership (LEP) areas are currently preparing for Government.
default* What is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local level decision-making on transport expenditure? defaultWhat are the advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?defaultThe rationale for devolution is about 
defaultputting decision making closer to the people affected
default.  
defaultEngland has become one of the most centralised countries in Europ
defaulte, therefore increasing the disconnect between Whitehall and ‘the people’
default.  
defaultWhitehall faces the significant challenge of understanding why investment in transport, or any other type of infrastructure, is needed. 
defaultThis 
defaultneed is best understood by those who a
defaultre directly accountable to the people where the investment is needed.
defaultThis new approach allows City Regions to make long term, strategic plans 
defaulton major infrastructure and avoid the stop-go delivery of national projects.  
defaultIn SCR, the BRT North scheme incurr
defaulted an 8 month delay and resulted in additional funding being sought as a consequence of additional processes introduced by Government. The addition of the development pool and the Best and Final Bidding Process increased the level of uncertainty for the Pr
defaultoject, which could have been avoided through greater local controls. 
default, 
default 
defaultDevolvement of decisions on transport expenditure is only the start of the journey. Areas like the Sheffield City Region (SCR) are 
defaultstrengthening
default governance arrangements and 
defaultestablishing 
defaultan accountable body to deal with strategic transport and economic rege
defaultneration decision making. In the SCR this is in the form of a Combined Authority. The wider remit of these bodies
default and the role of the private sector
default, 
defaultare 
defaultcritical to ensuring that investment 
defaultdecisions 
defaultsolve the economic problem, not just transport problem.
default 
defaultAt present 
defaultthe Combined Authority
default 
defaultis 
defaultlacking two important features, which 
defaultif available, 
defaultwould 
defaultfurther enhance 
defaultthe delivery of 
defaultthis wider remit of strategic economic regeneration. 
defaultCurrently, 
defaultthe Combined Authority
default 
defaultis 
defaultunable to claim VAT and can only lev
defaulty for transport funding.  
defaultIt is vital that Combined Authorities can raise funds to spend on investment across a range of activities including transport, and that the statute that underpins the Combined Authority
default,
default enables this function.
default* Do local bodies (idefaultncluding Local Authorities, Local Enterprise Partnerships, Passenger Transport Executives, Integrated Transport Authorities and Local Transport Boards) have the capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes? What would the optimum delidefaultvery body look like?defaultThe move from central decision making to local decision making brings with it cost 
defaultand 
defaultresource 
defaultimplications
default. 
defaultLocal bodies have the capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes, 
defaultthe challenge is resourcing this
default.  
defaultThe 
defaultcost will be borne by local partners and 
defaultit 
defaultis expected 
defaultto be funded
default collectively, through funding available at the SCR Region level (rather than local contributions).
default L
defaultike most City Regions, SCR will choose to ‘top
default-
defaultslice’ their fund
default but
default we want to kee
defaultp this to a minimum
default,
default in order to retain focus upon scheme delivery.  
defaultAs with any shift of this type, Local Authority partners will need to work through what is best for their area. Alongside the need to allocate resource is the need to reduce costs, so it
default will be important for LTB’s/LEP’s to work with other areas to find ways of sharing resources and 
defaultworking more closely together.
default  SCR are working across the City Region to appraise schemes a
defaultgainst a set of shared criteria
default 
defaultand
default work
defaulting
default with other LEP areas t
defaulto share technical processes
default.  This open approach to working practices
default maintain
defaults
default efficiency
default through the pooling of resources
default.
defaultTo support this new approach, the SCR LTB has agreed an Assurance Framework.  This was created to support our decision making and outlines the tools which will be used within this framework. 
defaultThis framework can be applied to all types of infrastructure 
defaultproj
defaultects, which is
default in keeping with the aspirations of the Local Growth Fund and facilitates cross-silo
default 
defaultworking.  
defaultIt is expected that the delivery body for decision making will be a combination of a central officer team, supported by a panel of consultancy expe
defaultrts. 
defaultDelivery of the investment will not change in SCR as scheme promoters
default,
default (typically Local Authorities)
default,
default will remain the delivery body. Promoters will need to demonstrate to local decision makers in their business case, that they have the capacity to de
defaultliver, to justify the investment. By separating the investment decisions from the delivery, 
defaultmaintains a 
defaultclear 
defaultdistinction 
defaultbetween decision makers and promoters.
default* What is the best way of dealing with major transport schemes that cross Local Authority bounddefaultaries or have wider regional impact?defaultFor investment that has 
defaulta 
defaultregional impact
default,
default it will be critical that the promoter works with the Local Authorities and Combined Authority(ies), to demonstrate how the investment supports the priorities of the places where investment is planned. 
defaultIt is felt that the LEPs are able to deal with major t
defaultransport schemes 
defaultthat 
defaultcross boundaries and more mature 
defaultworking relationships 
defaultwill be able to overcome differences
default,
default to ens
defaulture high Value for Money scheme
default 
defaultdelivery
default.  
defaultAs LEP’s and Combined Authorities become more established in their role to shape regional i
defaultnvestment, it is expected that LEP’s will work more collaboratively on regional projects.  
defaultA good example of this in practice is the Rail North Strategy which emerged from cross boundary working between Sheffield, Manchester and Leeds City Regions.  T
defaulthe pa
defaultrtnership 
defaultwas 
defaultformed to influence rail devolution in the north
default and demonstrates joint working in practice, between LEPs
default. 
defaultSimilarly, South Yorkshire and West Yorkshire have worked collaboratively on the introduction of Smartcard schemes and joint healthcare
default services
default,
default therefore collaborative working is not the issue for us.   
defaultC
defaultross boundary scheme negotiation has two elements
default;
default 
defaultf
defaultirstly, the appropriate governance in place to make decisions across the geography where the investment is proposed.  
defaultSecondly, it i
defaults important to have evidence to support decision making.
default 
defaultT
defaulthe SCR Combined Authority provide
defaults
default the Accountable Body to make these decisions
default 
defaultand the 
defaultSCR land use and transport model (FLUTE model), enables schemes to be assessed on a consistent basis, regardle
defaultss of whether they cross Local Authority boundaries.
default  As SCR have the tools in place and the working relationships with partners to facilitate cross boundary scheme delivery, greater financial autonomy would enable the delivery of more schemes at a local l
defaultevel.  
default  
default* How effectively do local bodies work with each other and with Government departments and national transport agencies?defaultFor this question there good and bad examples of how various organisations work together.  As described above, the Rail North 
defaultpartnership is a good example of how local bodies have come together with national transport agencies and Government, to establish a proposition to shape future franchising of regional rail services in the north.
defaultT
defaulthere is more work to do to 
defaultfurther 
defaultalign t
defaulthe priorities of local bodies with external agencies
default,
default that have the potential to make significant differences to local areas. 
defaultCurrently the approach to consultation 
defaultis
default a one way process.  
default Local Authorities are currently providing input to National Infrast
defaultructure Strategies but at the moment, it is unclear how our comments have 
defaultbeen reflected.   Our preferred model of consultation would be where local priorities are clearly set out within national plans, with a mix of 
defaultlocal and agency delivery.
defaultIt is essent
defaultial that Government departments continue to work with LEP’s.  This collaboration is enabling local partner
defaults
default to focus decision making on local priorities that meet national objectives. In some areas the relationships are well established, for example with t
defaulthe Homes and Communities Agency, Department for Transport and Department for Communities and Local Government. SCR see the
defaultse
default relationships as a positive outcome of the move towards localism and will seek to strength
defaulten
default the working relationships through the 
defaultStrategic Economic Plan.
default* Do the current funding streams for major local transport schemes meet the needs of Local Authorities? How do current funding streams compare with previous arrangements? defaultThe current funding streams 
defaultare insufficient and 
defaultdo not mee
defaultt the needs of 
defaultL
defaultocal 
defaultA
defaultuthorities
default.
default SCR are seeking to correct this by securing major infrastructure funding that allows the area to invest in the transformational infrastructure that can grow the economy.  Transport and connectivity are a vital part of the mix of infrastructure investment 
defaultrequired and we continue to encourage Government to devolve more funding on this basis.
defaultPteg has prepared a separate response in which they identify the significant gap between investment in PTE areas and London. We support the points made in their respons
defaulte which outline the impact of the gap in infrastructure funding, outside of London. SCR see the SEP as the mechanism to rebalance the investment in major schemes.
default* What impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introddefaultuction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?defaultFor SCR, devolution has been a positive process, enabling Local Authorities to 
defaultbetter prioritise 
defaultwork  across the geography. 
defaultDevolution 
defaulthas enabled the 
defaultestablishment of 
defaulta Combined Authority to progress at pace, 
defaultalongside the creation of an 
defaultambitious 
defaultinfrastructure investment programme
default.
defaultSCR took 
defaultthe 
defaultdecision 
defaultat the start of our journey
default 
defaultto think about a wider programme of investment
default,
default beyond transport
default.
default 
defaultT
defaulthe 
defaultdevolution of funding 
defaultfrom Government
default 
defaultwill 
defaultenable faster and
default better prioritisation of schemes and allow local accountability
default,
default using local knowledge to select how and where schemes should be delivered for maximum impact.  
defaultWe expect to see this type of approach adopted more widely in other areas, for example our neig
defaulthbours (West Yorkshire and D2N2) are looking at how to move their transport fund to a wider investment fund, as we have already done.
defaultThe role of the LTB will change in the context of the Strategic Economic Plan and the wider investment decisions that Comb
defaultined Authorities will make. SCR partners have always seen the LTB as part of a wider function of the CA and we are not surprised that the governance we are seeking to establish, matches Government
default’
defaults ambitions to provide funding for a range of activities th
defaultrough a single source. As a result of the CA and Local Growth Fund, the LTB will be subsumed within a wider decision making body
default,
default so that decisions on strategic investment are taken by a single body.
default* How can Local Authorities attract greater investment fdefaultrom the private sector for the delivery and maintenance of local transport infrastructure? What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?defaultTo attract greater investment it is critical to have a clear and well evidenced proposition that prov
defaultides a return
default, which 
defaultthe private sector is interested in. The work SCR have undertaken to create the SCR Investment Fund (SCRIF) is focussed on having a clear proposition from which negotiations can begin. 
defaultUnderpinning the proposition is the need for 
defaultlonger-term certainty over available funds as a baseline for wider ambitions. SCR have been successful in securing a 10 year allocation through the City Deal process for devolved Major Scheme Transport Funding to provide that baseline, but this is only the
default beginning.
defaultThe ambition for SCRIF is to provide a ‘fund of funds’ to deliver long-term programmes of investment.  The funding will work on two levels. Firstly at the programme level by combining a range of funds allocated to the City Region, the Combined 
defaultAuthority will have the ability to deliver transformational schemes on a scale that individual authorities may find more challenging. Secondly, at a scheme level by demonstrating local commitment to a scheme, promoters will be in a stronger position to sec
defaulture contributions or to accelerate delivery, as the level of certainty over the longer term is increased. This negotiation will help to reduce the call on the programme level funding, enabling more schemes to be delivered.
defaultIn the case of public transport i
defaultnvestment, it is unlikely that these types of intervention give a return on investment, so will therefore be unattractive to the private sector.  The capital investment made is likely to continue to be supported by the public sector but the on
default-
defaultgoing use of
default these assets will need to have commercial buy in from the private sector.  To make the best use of investment and to support the private sector, SCR are exploring other flexibilities (e.g. TIF), to capture 
defaultthe 
defaultlocal value added and offset 
defaultthis 
defaultagainst sch
defaulteme costs. 
defaultFor transport
default,
default the need to express the proposition is especially important in the context of ensuring that external agencies, including the Government, deliver investment that complements local priorities.  SCR will be expressing through the St
defaultrategic Economic Plan, the work that has been undertaken to demonstrate the investment needed to provide the right transport offer to businesses, for example for connectivity to HS2 stations.
default* How clear are the lines of accountability for local decision mdefaultaking on transport expenditure?defaultThe lines of accountability within the Sheffield City Region are very clear.  The Combined Authority has been established as the accountable body, which has a clear structure 
defaultin place
default.
default  The Combined Authority
default has membership from elected members and operates under the guidance of an Assurance Framework, which has been agreed by all 
defaultmember Authorities.
default 
default 
default  
default   
defaultThe
default Assurance Framework sets out how decisions are taken and who is responsible at each stage.  
defaultLocal Authority partners form part of the decision making structure and as they are also the scheme promoters, this creates a lean decision making structure. 
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default Tony Travers; The Guardian, 
defaultJuly 2013
default [
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/local-government-ne
defaulttwork/2013/jul/10/tony-travers-devolution-local-government
default]
default