&#xa0;
default              
default              
default              
default              
default               
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultAbleChildAfricadefault&#xa0;default1.1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAbleChildAfrica is a UK based charity working with and alongside partner organisations in Africa to achieve equal rights for disabled children and young people
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are the leading UK charity working exclusively wit
defaulth and fo
defaultr disabled children in Africa. Our partners work on the ground to challenge and address the barriers faced by disabled people.
default1.2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAdopting a rights-based approach, we recognise that a person is disabled by the attitudinal, institutional and environmen
defaulttal barriers they face within society and therefore addressing these barriers is a means to achieving equality. Through our work, we highlight and address the additional and 
defaultspecific barriers that disabled children and their families face. 
default1.3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe are
default an active member of 
defaultthe UK network Bond
default’s Disability and Development Group (DDG), UNICEF’s Global Partnership on Children with Disabilities and the International Disability and Development Consortiu
defaultm (IDDC); 
defaultAbleChildAfrica also upholds the fundamental pr
defaultinciple of “nothing about us without us”.
default1.4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAbleChildAfrica welcomes this 
defaulttimely 
defaultinquiry by the IDSC into disability and development, which we see as an invaluable opportunity to build on and enhance the role of the UK government in promoting inclusive devel
defaultopment. 
defaultThere is now widespread agreement that the MDGs and development priorities will fail unless they are met for 
defaultall 
defaultpeople and that disabled people must be included.  There is also recognition that an individual’s impairment interacts with other factors to influence development outcomes and that 
defaultdisability should be as a core development topic within an inequalities fra
defaultmework.
default 
default1.5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn our work, we continue to see inequalities and barriers experienced by disabled children and their families; this evidence submission is intended to
default high
defaultlight some of these issues
default, with a particular focus on our area of e
defaultxpertise, children and f
defaultamilies
default. 
default&#xa0;
default2.1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultDFID’s current policy commitments on disability and development
default2.1.1.
default 
defaultAbleChildAfrica commends the positive work being done by DFID through its twin-track approach to disability. It is a leader in promoting t
defaulthe rights 
defaultand 
defaultinclusion of disabled people in development and putting the issue of disability on the global agenda. Its ‘Disability, Poverty and Development’ issues paper, 
defaultg
defaultuidance note and other disability practice papers comprehensively detail what needs
default to be done to ensure that disability is no longer side lined.  
default2.1.2.
default 
default While this high level support is evident, there is still a noticeable gap between the sentiments of the papers and what is actually being practiced on the ground. For instance, despite the 2
default007 practice paper on ‘Working on Disability in Country Programmes’, a 
default2011 
defaultreport highlighted the significant absence of written statements in DFID country operational plans to reduce educational marginalisation for any vulnerable group other than girls
default.
default 
defaultUnless these papers are elevated to policies and implementation monitored, we fear there will be little change in practices, particularly with regard to 
defaultmainstreaming.
default2.1.3.
default 
default We recommend that a policy 
defaultthat draws together and builds on these existing documents 
defaultand DFID’s twin-track approach 
defaultis developed, implemented, and 
defaultresourced
default with a realistic and practical monitoring and accountability fra
defaultmework.
default&#xa0;
default2.2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultDisability mainstreaming within DFID’s sector programmes
default2.2.1.
default 
default DFID’s recognition that the MDGs cannot be achieved without addressing disability is an important statement that highlights the necessity of disability mainstreaming. As an effective tool for bridging the equity gap, we hope to see DFID continue and stren
defaultgthen its efforts to incorporate disability mainstreaming practices across its sector programmes.
default2.2.2.
default 
default Currently there is still room for improvement to be made by DFID, particularly within core sectors - such as health and education - that impact the lives of 
defaultdisabled people. For example, although over 20% of the UK aid budget for this financial year has been allocated to health
default, we continue to observe many difficulties faced by disabled children and their families in accessing and receiving health services, a
defaultt disproportionate levels to others. In fact, a recent study by Plan International found that
default 
defaultdisabled children
default are significantly more likely to have had a serious illness, including malnutrition than 
defaulttheir non-disabled peers
default. In the areas where we work, 
defaultthis pattern was observed most strongly for children with intellectual impairments. 
default2.2.3.
default 
default Within the education sector, DFID has s
defaultupport
defaulted
default developing countries
default’
default 
defaultwork towards achieving the MDG
default of 
defaultuniversal primary education
default (UPE), unfortunately research demonstr
defaultates this progress has actually increased disparities faced by disabled children. P
defaultolitically reverberant pressure to meet 
defaultMDG/UPE
default deadlines has contributed to increasingly overcrowded classes, insufficiently trained teachers and dec
defaultlining quality; 
defaultefforts
default to meet 
defaultUPE
default 
defaultthen 
defaultmay 
defaultironically be 
defaulthindering the 
defaultconditions necessary for 
defaultthe inclusion of disabled children, without whom the goal cannot ultimately to be 
defaultrealis
defaulted.
default We endorse the comprehensive 2010 DFID practice paper ‘Education for Children with Disabi
defaultlities – Improving access and quality’. Yet as with the health sector, there is still much
default to be done on transforming this 
defaultguidance notes into institutionalised practices and approaches. 
default2.2.3.1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAlmost ¾ of out of school children are in sub-Saharan Africa and dis
defaultabled children are disproportionately represented in this group
default.  In fact, up to 98% of disabled children in developing countries do not attend school (UNICEF). The 
defaultWorld Report on Disability
default reaffirms the finding that disabled children are less likely to
default attend school and demonstrates the adverse impact this has on human capital formation, employment, future earnings and productivity in adulthood
default.  
default2.2.3.2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultEvidence shows that whilst 63% of African children finish primary school, only 2% of disabled children 
defaultreach this stage
default. 
defaultIn 
defaultTanzania where we work, being disabled doubles the probability that a child will never attend school
default.  M
defaultaking effective use of DFID’s practice paper on education, 
defaultcould result in a 
defaultsignificant positive shift in 
defaultthese
default figure
defaults
default.
default2.2.4.
default 
default To hel
defaultp enhance its mainstreaming efforts, we also recommend that DFID utilises
default 
defaultdisability-disaggregated data and indicators. Guidance should also be available on how to plan for and gather accurate data. AbleChildAfrica is aware that many disabled children lack
default access to protection, medical, psychosocial and legal services (UNICEF, 2005)
default 
defaultso it is particularly important to ensure that data 
defaults
defaulturrounding these 
defaultissues 
defaultare disaggregated within UK aid grants and country programmes.
default&#xa0;
default2.3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultDFID’s approach to rehabilitation an
defaultd service provision for disabled people
default2.3.1.
default 
default DFID’s practice papers rightly identify and emphasise that both mainstream and disability specific services 
defaultshould be
default holistic in their delivery. We call on DFID to ensure that both tracks are addressed simultaneous
defaultly in a coordinated way. Furthermore, early interventions can reduce the likelihood of intersecting issues compounding upon on
defaulte another.  O
defaultur partners 
defaultoften tell us 
defaultthat poor access to health care, habilitation and rehabilitation services impacts on the ac
defaultcessibility of education and skills training for disabled children and young people. 
default2.3.2.
default 
default As a signatory of the UN Convention on the Right
defaults of Persons with Disabilities
default, the UK
default government supports the right to the provision of learning materials, sign languag
defaulte and other assistive technologies. 
defaultWe
default would
default therefore call upon DFID to ensure that
default a
defaultssistive aids
default that support a disabled child’s development and functionality 
defaultare
default considered an essential service provision across all projects. While doing so, it is impor
defaulttant to avoid stockpiling of unwanted or unsuitable devices, so there should be flexibility in the procurement requirements for such items to ensure that actual individual needs on the ground are being met. 
default2.3.3.
default 
default Of particu
defaultlar concern to AbleChildAfrica
default, are t
defaulthe unmet needs of children with 
defaultlearning disabilities or 
defaultintellectual impairments and 
defaultthose
default with complex impairments
default, as well as
default their families. Entrenched stigma and social isolation unfortunately mean that actual prevalence will remain underreported unti
defaultl data collection and reporting are improved, however we know from our partners that the ability of families to access quality, or any, services remains a challenge. We believe there is an opportunity for DFID to be a leader in addressing this gap and sett
defaulting the model for good practice using its rights-based approach. 
default2.3.4.
default 
default Finally, we recommend that the indicators used to measure success in the fields of rehabilitation and service provision go beyond tangible outputs and short term results
default to measure the real impact on individual lives. For example, a child who receives a wheelchair may not necessarily be able to access their local school or other community facilities and therefore continues to face barriers to inclusion. Such data should b
defaulte captured across mainstream as well as disability-specific programmes.
default&#xa0;default2.4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultStrength of the evidence base on ‘what works’ in development programmes involving disability
default2.4.1.
default 
default The 
defaultDFID funded Disabili
defaultty Knowledge and Research 
defaultprogramme has provided an invaluable bank of knowledge and information in relation to disability and development. 
defaultf
defaultilling the data gap on disability should still remain a priority for DFID to 
defaultguide
default the level and types of interventions being made in its pro
defaultgrammes. 
default2.4.2.
default 
default 
defaultAbleChildAfrica believes it is important not to assume the criteria for what makes strategies effective; the evidence needs to be fed back from the ground and reflect the views of disabled children, youth and adults. We would also like to highli
defaultght that disability inclusive best practices will vary from country to country and therefore can
defaultnot 
defaultbe applied generically.
default2.4.3.
default 
default 
defaultOur experience has shown that there is often
default hesitancy
default around applying inclusive practices in mainstream programmes
default, from governmen
defaultt and civil society alike
default. This 
defaultis 
defaultlargely due to misassumptions that it is too costly
default or complicated
default a process and can only be done with specialists available at all times. We have found that inclusive programming tools and Disability Equality Training ar
defaulte effective ways of supporting 
defaultinclusive development.
default&#xa0;
default2.5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultRole of disabled people in DFID’s policy and programmes
default2.5.1.
default 
default In recent years we have seen positive steps taken by DFID to ensure that disabled people have a bigger role and more voice within its work. Of p
defaultarticular note is the collaboration with disabl
defaulted person’s organisations
default 
default(DPOs) 
defaultto undertake 
defaultaccessibility audits of DFID offices as well as steps taken
default to receive direct feedback from project beneficiaries. However, there is little evidence of DFID direct
defaultly listening to the voices of disabled 
defaultchildren
default or their families and we call upon DFID to extend their consultative practice to this group as well.
default2.5.2.
default 
default AbleChildAfrica is however, concerned that disabled people, particularly children, still remain mainly rec
defaultipients of aid rather than leaders and implementers of the process. It is our belief that disabled people of all ages must play a central role in all stages of policy and programme development as well as implementation. 
defaultWithin Africa
default there are cultural con
defaultstraints on the role of a child and their visibility is less pronounced. Combined with the added marginalisation of being disabled, it is important to safeguard the voices and opinions of disabled children
default 
defaultin addition to promoting their access to services, social participation, inclusive play and protection. For empowerment and advocacy outcomes in particular, which can be harder to measure, we strongly recommend engaging with disabled children and y
defaultouth, as
default well as their families, 
defaultto determine what they consider to be indicators of success within such programmes. 
default2.5.3.
default 
defaultDisabled girls in particular are known to face more barriers than boys,
default 
defaultespecially in 
defaultsocieties 
defaultthat 
defaultfavour males to females
default. This makes them less
default likely to obtain health care, get an education, receive vocational training or find employment
default. On top of this, women and girls with disabilities are more 
defaultlikely to experience
default practices which qualify as torture or inhuman or degrading treatment and are m
defaultore susceptible to violence and abuse
default. The 
defaultmultiple 
defaultdiscrimination and additional marginalisation 
defaultdisabled girls
default face 
defaultresults in poorer access to services and silenced voices 
defaultwithin the development auditorium.
default&#xa0;
default2.6.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFinancial costs and benefits of 
defaultan increased
default emphasis on disability
default2.6.1.
default 
defaultDFID’s Disability, Poverty and Dev
defaultelopment paper states that disability is a cause and consequence of poverty. 
defaultEmpowerment of disabled people to break out of the chronic poverty cycle requires directed efforts to ensure their access
default to services and inclusion in the society; 
defaultgiving consideration to disability issues and investing accordingly directly contributes to reducing poverty.  We recommend DFID adopt a policy of introducing an accessibility budget line into all programme funds 
defaultin support of this goal. “Poverty reduction cannot be met without considering the needs of disabled people.”
default 
default2.6.2.
default 
defaultWe welcome DFID’s recent announcement to 
defaultonly 
defaultsupport the construction of accessible schools and hope to see a comprehensive approach of inclusiv
defaulte design applied. It will be important that guidelines on accessibility, as well as training on these guidelines
default,
default are rolled 
defaultout. We would like to encourage DFID to continue in this vein with all infrastructure project
default,
defaults especially since 
defaultthe 
defaultWorld Bank est
defaultimates that 
defaultaccessibility cost
defaults
default are generally less than 1% of total construction costs
default. 
default2.6.3.
default 
default Investing in early childhood development is also an important way of not only engaging with the issue of inclusion, but also increasing the chances of detecting and 
defaultpreventing health issues that can lead to lifelong impairments. Being excluded from early childhood education significantly reduces the opportunities that disabled children can have later in life in terms of securing wor
defaultking and financial stability. 
defaultResear
defaultch demonstrates that an individual’s potential income can increase by as much as 10% with each additional year of schooling
default, and this figure is likely to be even greater for disabled people, whose baseline earnings are undoubtedly significantly lower. Fur
defaultthermore
default this increased independency will 
defaultreduce the financial 
defaultresponsibility
default that is often
default placed on
default family members and government funds.
default 
default&#xa0;
default2.7.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultUK’s work with other development agencies and partner governments on disability
default2.7.1.
default 
default AbleChildAfrica considers the UK 
defaultGovernment to be a world leader in promoting disability inclusion within the international development sector. There is still much to be done and it is our hope that more resources will be invested to support the work being championed by DFID and UK parlia
defaultmentarians. 
default2.7.2.
default 
defaultCurrently d
defaultonor funds for disability projects tend to be project-based rather than supporting national 
defaultdisability strategies or 
defaultCBR programme
defaults
default. As a consequence there 
defaultcan be a
default significant separation 
defaultacross various
default initiatives
default, with
default no common s
defaulttandard of good practice, 
defaultthus hindering
default sustainability. 
defaultSupporting interventions at the strategic level would also be an 
defaultopportunity to strengthen the ties between government and civil societ
defaulty organisations and promote
default disability mainstreaming
default.
default2.7.3.
default 
default 
defaultTo facili
defaulttate affirmative action we recommend that DFID ring fences funds - in line with its twin tack approach - for initiatives that particularly target disabled people
default, with a proportion set aside for the needs of children,
default as well as 
defaultsetting aside sufficient re
defaultsources to ensure disability is mainstreamed across all DFID funding mechanisms
default.
default2.7.4.
default 
default 
defaultWe call on DFID to require all grant applications, government funding and country programmes to outline how funds w
defaultill impact upon disability (as 
defaultis currently the case for ge
defaultnder)
default. Where possible all projects should actively include disabled people and at a minimum it should be 
defaulta requirement
default that projects don’t inadvertently exclude or increa
defaultse barriers for disabled people particularly children.
default2.7.5.
default 
defaultThrough its bilateral programme
defaults, we would like to see DFID w
defaultork
defaulting
default with government partners 
defaultto facilitate 
defaultdisabled people’s participation in the formulation
default and implementation
default of 
defaultinclusive
default 
defaultPoverty Reduction Strategy Plans. This would increase their democratic ownership
default,
default which in turn w
defaultould help 
defaultintended outcomes be realised. 
default2.8.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultUK’s role in ensuring disability inclusive post-2015 development goals
default2.8.1.
default 
default 
defaultAbleChildAfrica commends DFID for this timely enquiry; the UK Government itself has recognised momentum is building and that the post-2015 
defaultdev
defaultelopment a
defaultgenda has the potential to be watershed moment in history for disability and development
default.  The recent 
defaultHigh Level Panel and Secretary General’s reports on post-2015 call for a transformative shift which ‘leaves no one behind’, they highlight the 
defaultimportance of disaggregating indicators to support this, and state that ‘no target should be considered met unless met for all social groups, including people with disabilities’.
default AbleChildAfrica echoes these sentiments.
default2.8.2.
default 
default 
defaultHowever, this framework has not yet been agreed, and we call upon the UK Government to ensure that disability inclusion and an inequality framework remains central and explicit.  We encourage the UK Government to use continue using its position as a global
default leader and to work alongside civil society to maintain vigilance and pressure in the final moments. 
default&#xa0;
default3.1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultDFID should continue to build upon its solid foundations employing both its rights-based and twin-track approaches. 
defaultFollowing its successful growth in disability-focused work, attention should now be given to strengthening disability mainstreaming across all DFID’s sector programmes.
default3.2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultA policy for inclusive development should be created, drawing together into one concise
default document all the good work developed by DFID in the past and developing a robust implementation plan as well as monitoring and accountability framework that includes tools and indicators of inclusion. To ensure wider engagement and ownership it should be 
defaultdeveloped through a participatory approach
default - 
defaultinclusive of children
default -
default and should include benchmarks of good practice in inclusion (e.g. the central role of disabled people in policy and programmes).
default 
default3.3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultA series of ‘quick win’ policies that address factors for
default exclusion should be introduced into DFID’s operations and practices. These could include utilising positive discrimination quotas for disabled people, particularly 
defaultchildren and 
defaultfemales; committing to ensuring that 
defaultall
default UK aid infrastructure projects are ac
defaultcessible; introducing an accessibility budget line into project templates and ensuring all new projects must highlight how they will impact upon disabled people in the conceptualisation phase.
default3.4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWhile disability is a cross-cutting issue, there are particular
default issues, such as abuse, 
defaultviolence
default, access to basic rights and social exclusion that disproportionately affect disabled children which need to be identified and addressed. In addition to this, c
defaulthildhood disability systemically impacts upon the whole family.
default 
default3.5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultWe strongly recommend that all actions are guided by the goal of assuring the full and meaningful participation for disabled people, of all ages. Moreover, ensuring a holistic approach to disability in development involves recognising that disabled people
default are not a homogenous group and have varying needs depending upon their age, gender, impai
defaultrment, context and environment.
default3.6.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAbleChildAfrica is 
defaulthappy to expand upon or support DFID with any of the above calls to action and is available
default to lend our 
defaultunique 
defaultexpe
defaultrtise on the multifaceted considerations impacting upon disabled children 
defaultand their families in Africa.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultWe recognise the complexities and ongoing debate surrounding terminology regarding disability. However, as an organisation in the UK we have chosen to support and advance the UK Disability movement and their stated preference of using the terms ‘disabled p
defaulterson’ or ‘disabled child’ in recognition of the social model’s primary tenet that an individual is disabled 
defaultby
default societal barriers.
default  
default Equity and Inclusion for All in Education, G
defaultlobal 
defaultC
defaultampaign for 
defaultE
defaultducation
default (2011) 
default 
defaulthttp://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/sector/
default Include us! - A study of disability among Plan International's sponsored children, Plan International (2013)
default UN MDG Report (2010)
default 
defaultWorld Report on Disability, 
defaultWHO and World Bank (2011)
default Education for All Global Monitoring Report, UNESCO (2008)
default UN MDG Report (2010)
default 
defaultChildren and Young People with Disabilities Fact Sheet, UNICEF (2013)
default Thematic study on the issue of violence against women and girls and disab
defaultility, UNOHCHR (2012)
default European Commission (2004)
default Education for All: The Cost of Accessibility, World Bank (2005)
default Building Human Capacities in Least Developed Countries to Promote Poverty Eradication and Sustainable Development,
default 
default 
default    
defaultUNESCO ( 2011)
default Lynne Featherstone, Parliamentary Secretary of State for International Development, to the High-Level Meeting on Disability and Development
default