              
default              
default              
defaultWritten evidence from
default Enterprise Rent-A-Car (CMI0019)
default&#xa0;default1. Overviewdefault&#xa0;
defaultThis paper has been prepared by Enterprise Rent-A-Car in response to the Transport Select Committee’s call for evidence on Government 
defaultproposals for reducing the number and co
defaults
defaultts of whiplash claims
default, which
default 
defaultEnterprise 
defaulthas 
defaultwelcome
defaultd
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultEnterprise ha
defaults expressed concerns on a number of occasions about the huge increase 
defaultthat the business faces 
defaultin 
defaultexposure to 
defaultpersonal injury liability costs
default, which
default have
default tripled since 2005
default.
default 
defaultThese costs ultimately impact the
default 
defaultamount that consumers pay for rental services. While
default we wish to ensure that those with serious and legitimate injuries are able to gain the compensation they need, we support furt
defaulther action to 
defaultmak
defaulte it harder for anyone wanting to make a fraudulent or exaggerated claim to abuse the system. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe welcome the Transport Select Committee
default’
defaults 
defaultefforts 
defaultto expedite the implementation of the current proposals for whiplash and soft-tissue personal injury claims as set out in the Ministry of Justice’s Command Paper. 
defaultWe also welcome the opportunity to comment further on the measures set out in this paper. 
defaultIn 
defaultparticular
default,
default we would 
defaultlike to see the Government act swiftly 
defaultto re
defaultdress the burden of evidence so it 
defaultis balanced between claimants and defendants. 
defaultWe believe that the t
defaultwo key measures 
defaultto achieve this
default are
default, firstly,
default the implementation of mandatory medical rep
defaultort
defaults
default before offers of compensation and
default, secondly,
default the reconsideration of raising the small claims threshold track. 
default&#xa0;
default2. Introduction to Enterprise Rent-A-Cardefault&#xa0;defaultEnterprise Rent-A-Car was founded in 1957 and is an industry leading, multi-national company with approximately one million vehicles in its global rental fleet and an 
defaultannual turnover of more than $16.4
default billion. In the UK its current rental fleet is over 5
default5
default,000 vehicles, which makes 
defaultit
default the largest car rental company as well as the biggest private purchaser of vehicles in the
default country. Enterprise employs 3,5
default00 people in the UK across 
defaultmore than 
default370 office and branches – more sites than any other rental company.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs a large fleet owner and operator, Enterprise’s business model depends on being able to effectively manage the liability exposure associated with 
defaultthe company’s
default vehicles. Currently this exposure is our third highest expenses after fleet acquisition cost
defaults and personnel. However, our fleet liability costs have been significantly impacted in recent years by the huge increase in personal injury claims, with the growth driven by low value claims for soft-tissue injuries. This trend has seen our liability cost
defaults triple since 2005
default, which is 
defaultconsistent with the broad pattern identified by the MoJ.
default&#xa0;
default3. defaultIndependent medical panelsdefault&#xa0;defaultEnterprise 
defaultsupports
default t
defaulthe introduction of independent medical pa
defaultnels to assess whiplash claims. 
defaultTo
default ensure that the independence and impartiality of medical panels 
defaultwe also strongly support a system of peer review. 
defaultW
defaulte would like to see
default the implementation of these panels
default at th
defaulte earliest possible opportunity.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe 
defaultback 
defaultmeasures which intend to make the 
defaultmedical examinations of claimants’ soft-tissue 
defaultinjuries
default rigorous and 
defaultperformed
default 
defaultby practitioners who do not have vested interests in the outcome of the diagnosis. One our main concerns with the current system is the conflict of interest for practitioners ex
defaultamining the injuries of whiplash claimants. Many practitioners benefit financially from further referrals and often have close working relationships with legal organisations 
defaultthat
default use their services.
default 
defaultWe want to see the Government ensure that conflicts of in
defaultterest for all accredited professionals are reduced as far as possible 
default&#xa0;
defaultD
defaultiagnosis
default of whiplash injuries
default can be flawed when based so
defaultlely on self-reported symptoms and 
defaultwe 
defaultstrongly agree with
default the move towards shifting the burden
default of proof onto the claimant.
default 
defaultThe current system means 
defaultthat whiplash claims can be paid out by insurers on no more objective evidence than the word of a claimant that they suffered an injury in a car accident
default.
default We also believe that with soft-tissue injuries, where diagnosis can be diffi
defaultcult, medical practitioners should have access to the details of the accident and to the claimant’s medical history. 
defaultWe welcome the Committee’s request for further informa
defaulttion from the government and suggest 
defaultthat the Committee 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultpress the Governm
defaultent 
defaultto carry out a
default more comprehensive assessment of the medical examination process. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition
default, we believe the burden of evidence should shift more towards the claimant an
defaultd would like to see the Government consult on measures to require claimants to provide more information in support of a claim. 
defaultWhile the Government has argued in its most recent response to the Committee that mandatory medical reports could negate the need
default for evidence that a claimant saw a medical practitioner shortly after an accident, we would continue to
default agree 
defaultwith
default the Committee’s suggestions 
defaultin this area as they can help assess a claimant’s claim of injury if significant time has elapsed since an accid
defaultent. We also agree with the Committee’s
default 
defaultrecommendation of 
defaultpro
defaultvid
defaulting
default evidence of the impact of collision in relation to their injury.
default&#xa0;
defaultEnterprise
default welcome
defaults
default the introduction of accreditation for practitioners but would like to see further information on how t
defaulthe system of accreditation would work. It is important that the accreditation system is rigorous and ensures that 
defaultpractitioners remain impartial in their examination. However, we are concerned that this system will not go far enough without proper regulati
defaulton. The Association of British Insurers
default (ABI)
default 
defaultpresented evidence to the Committee 
defaultwhich showed 
defaultthat claimants are often triaged over the phone before their consultation and many have limited time, just a few minutes, with the medical expert prior to that e
defaultxpert giving their diagnosis. The ABI also said that several insurers highlighted reports of 
defaultsome general practitioners
default carrying out in excess of 2,000 medico-legal reports a year
default,
default in addition to running their own practice
defaults
default. We believe that any system of accreditation would need to ensure that proper consultation time is given for whiplash claimants and 
defaultthat 
defaultscrutiny could be given to 
defaultinstances where 
defaultpractitioners compile a large number of whiplash reports. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would also l
defaultike to see the Government provide more information on the proposal to provide equal access to medical reports for 
defaultclaimants,
default insurers and the courts. 
defaultWe are confident that this measure will contribute to reducing exaggeration on medical reports and will en
defaultable defendants to challenge disputed circumstances surrounding an accident. Enterprise therefore
default believe
defaults
default this is an important step in redressing the balance of 
defaultjustice between claimants and defendants and 
defaultwould like to see further details on this measure
default before 
defaulta swift implementation process in 
defaultspring
default 2014.
default&#xa0;
default4. Small Claims Track Thresholddefault&#xa0;
defaultThe current limit of £1,000 for personal injury claims means that a large proportion of RTA PI claims are going through the courts, which leaves defendants facing 
defaultsignificantly higher costs and litigation for personal injury claims brought against them.
default 
defaultEnterprise believes that 
defaultraising the threshold for small claims to £5,
default000 would ensure defendants are not saddled with extensive legal costs and litigation for cl
defaultaim
defaults of a relatively low value.
default 
defaultIt would also help reduce the cost of whiplash claims
default overall
default by 
defaultending the requirement
default for costly legal advice in many 
defaultclaims above £1,000.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also believe that increasing the small claims track is
default fundamental to 
defaultensuring 
defaultfraudulent and exaggerated whiplash claims are challenged
default. By ensuring a far greater number of claims proceed through 
defaultthe small claims track
default, the cost of challenging such claims significantly diminishes. 
defaultIn the past, the cost of challenging 
defaultpotentially 
defaultfra
defaultudulent or
default exaggerated claims has caused insurers to consistently make pre-medical report offers to claimants to offset potential litigation costs of challenging a claim outside the small claims track.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis issue has been longstanding and we would highlight that in 2005-06, the Citizens Advice Bureau, in written evidence to the Constitutional Affairs Committee inquiry into 
defaultThe Courts: small claims
default, suggested that with proper regulation there was a “stron
defaultg argument” that more cases could be dealt under the small claims track, possibly by raising the threshold for personal injury cases to £5,000. The Bureau also said that is supported the principle behind a wide small claims jurisdiction to ensure consumer 
defaultfriendliness and end the requirement to hire expensive legal professionals.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe accept that there are concerns, especially from stakeholders in the personal injury sector, that genuine claimants could be inhibited in 
defaulttheir access to justice and entitlement
default t
defaulto full compensatory amounts
default, however 
defaultwe 
defaultbelieve
default that a number of approaches
default,
default which would offset these concerns,
default 
defaultcould be 
defaulttaken if a decision was made to introduce
default a higher small claims threshold. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe agree with the Transport Select Committee that the Go
defaultvernment should provide analysis on ways in which the small claims track could be combined with routine submission of expert evidence. We believe that if
default the threshold rise was accompanied by
default measures to make medical reports mandatory for all personal inju
defaultry claims, this would ensure that all cases have received an expert assessment, regardless of the claims track used
default.
default We would also suggest that the introduction of independent and impartial medical boards will provide a rigorous assessment of all claims, wh
defaultich would alleviate c
defaultoncerns over accessibility and proper scrutiny
default for claimants under the small claims track.
default&#xa0;
defaultEn
defaultterprise believes that confidence in a higher threshold would grow after introduction, 
defaultas claimants became more aware of the procedures and system for small claims. It is important that claimants feel comfortable and assured that they can pursue genuine cl
defaultaims without the necessity for costly legal advice and representation. We believe the Government could offset some of these concerns by providing 
defaultinformation and advisory tools. 
defaultEnterprise believes that the Government should explore this approach in conjun
defaultction with an analysis of the impact of the electronic portal on claims management and costs, as suggested by the Committee.
default 
defaultEnterprise 
defaultwould add that it would 
defaultbe willing to work with other stakeholders in
default the car rental sector to provide information and s
defaultupport to those going through the small claims track.
default&#xa0;
defaultEnterprise would be interested to hear from the Government over what approaches it has considered towards the introduction of a higher threshold for the small claims track. Thi
defaults includes 
defaultany 
defaultassessment of the impact of mandatory pre-medical reporting 
defaulton the small claims system 
defaultand 
defaultwe
default agree with the Committee that the Government should provide analysis on ways in which the small claims track could be combined with routine submission of expert e
defaultvidence. 
default&#xa0;
default5. Pre-report claim offersdefault&#xa0;
defaultWe strongly support the 
defaultproposal to introduce a rule which would ensure that a claim can only proceed once a medical examination and report have been completed.
default This would underpin a comprehensive system of medical ex
defaultamination for all whiplash claims and would end the practice of pre-medical offers, which have been linked to the rise of spurious and opportunistic claims. 
defaultTogether with a system of accreditation it would also ensure that claimants 
defaultare 
defaultall equally subject
default to a
default rigorous but f
defaultair examination of their injuries. Enterprise would like to see the Gove
defaultrnment 
defaultundertake a proper assessment on the impact of introducing this rule and explore the possibility of introducing this rule in the package of currently propose
defaultd reforms. 
default&#xa0;
default6. Otherdefault&#xa0;
defaultEnterprise agrees with the Transport Select Committee that the Ministry of Justice should give its view on issues involved in limiting the right to compensation where a claim is shown to be grossly exaggerated. 
defaultWe would suggest that 
defaultclaimants who are attempting any form of deception within a system which is 
defaultintended
default to help the vulnerable 
defaultshould be penalised, including the 
defaultpossibility of forfeiting
default part or 
defaultthe 
defaulttotal sum of their entitled compensation.
default&#xa0;
defaultEnterprise
default also
default strongly
default 
defaultsupports
default the proposal to encourage the use of the Insurance Fraud Register
default and believes that any tool which allows organisations involved in the claims process to share data on known fraudsters to be universally beneficial.
default&#xa0;
default7default. Conclusiondefault&#xa0;defaultWe believe that the Government has made some significant progress in the proposals outlined in the whiplash Command Paper but would like to see 
defaultfar greater detail on the proposals outlined in the paper, such as the accreditation system for medical examiner
defaults. We would urge that not only is greater detail provided on the measures set out in the Command Paper, but the Government expedite the implementation of the main proposals outlined such as the independent medical panels. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition to this we would lik
defaulte to see the Government take proper account of measures suggested which have the potential to curb exaggerated and fraudulent claims and bring down 
defaultlitigation costs whilst
default safeguarding the ability of genuine claimants to receive full compensation. 
defaultThis inc
defaultludes 
defaultthe provision to all
default stakeholders in the 
defaultclaim
defaults process
default equal access to reports 
defaultand 
defaultintroducing a rule to ban pre-medical report offers which fail to examine cases on their proper merits.
default&#xa0;
defaultEnterprise also urges the Government to revisit the issue of 
defaultthe small clai
defaultms track
default threshold and believes that concerns over the access to justice for genuine claimants w
defaultould be alleviated through the implementation of a rigorous medical examination process 
defaultfor all claims
default.
default This would ensure that all cases are assessed rigorously by several medical experts 
defaultwhich would ensure genuine cases receive the attention they deserve, even in the absence of costly legal representation.
default 
defaultWe also believe tha
defaultt confidence in the system woul
defaultd 
defaultsignificantly grow after the first few years of implementation when stakeholders have 
defaulthad time to familiarise
default themselves with the process.
default&#xa0;defaultWe look forward to the Government’s response
default to the Committee’s call for evidence and look forward to engaging wit
defaulth the Government over its consultation over the implementation of the current proposals.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;default1default | defaultPage
default