&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultHertfordshire County Council
default (LTD0027)
default&#xa0;
defaultInquiry for local decision making on transport defaultexpendituredefault&#xa0;
default1.default              defaultResponse summarydefault1.1
default              
defaultIn general, Hertfordshire County Council is supportive of the devolution of transport expenditure to a more local level. 
defaultHowever, 
defaultthis is in part subject to there being a consistency in this devolved funding arrangement
default to enable a greater stability for the planning of transport expenditure at a local level to support 
defaultlong-term sustained 
defaultgrowth. The 
defaultc
defaultouncil would 
defaultalso be supportive of greater devolution to a local level, as while a level of funding has been devolved ther
defaulte remains an element of centralised priority setting that may, on occasion, be in conflict with well established, evidence-based locally supported improvements.
default              
defaultT
defaulthe council does 
defaultalso 
defaulthave some concern regarding the 
defaultability of the level of funding availabl
defaulte through devolved
default arrangements to be able to support large projects of national or sub-national importance
default in local areas
default. The main points that the council wishes to express are:
default&#xa0;
default1.2
default              
defaultThe below addresses each point identified by the Committee in turn.
default2.default              defaultWhat is the rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve to a local level decision-making odefaultn transport expenditure? What are the advantages and disadvantages of the Government’s approach? Are there better models?default&#xa0;default2.1
default              
defaultThe rationale for the Government’s proposals to devolve decision-making on transport expenditure to a local level is to enable lo
defaultcal people and organisations, through elected representatives
default, 
defaultstatutory bodies
default and business representatives (through LEPs)
default, to have a greater say in how 
defaultfunding is spent at a local level
default. The County Council welcomes this general principle.
default2.2
default              
defaultThe 
defaultdevolution of transport expenditure to local level decision-making organisations allows for their local knowledge and experience to be applied and used more directly to overcome local issues. This provides for a local assessment and application of a projec
defaultts benefits at a local level against locally relevant criteria, while still enabling wider national priorities to be taken in to account (although with less influence on final funding decisions).
default2.3
default              
defaultThe stability of this devolved funding is critical to th
defaulte long-term success of local decision making for transport expenditure. Having overcome initial challenges, as identified below, to develop effective organisations and structures, 
defaultit is important that 
defaultdevolved funding at a local level 
defaultis maintained to 
defaultsupp
defaultort longer-term priority setting, programme management and delivery to address local barriers to growth.
default2.4
default              
defaultThe council would, additionally, support a greater level of devolved funding and decision making to further enhance local accountability.
default While the
default current level of devolved funding and decision making is to be welcomed, there remains an element of centralised priority setting that may, on occasion, be in conflict with well established, evidence-based locally supported improvements. The council would
default, therefore, support a greater level of devolution to be considered that provided for a greater level of local decision making with less prescription from Government.
default2.5
default              
defaultA 
defaultkey challenge with
default this approach has been in ensuring that local statutory bodies a
defaultnd decision makers have 
defaultthe capacity
default and specialist staff
default to enable them to be able to
default take on roles 
defaulteffectively 
defaultpreviously undertaken by the Government and Regional Bodies, namely the
default manage
defaultment
default, prioritis
defaultation
default, and allocat
defaultion of
default funding for local transpo
defaultrt schemes. However, this was primarily an issue as a result of 
defaultsome of 
defaultthese organisation
defaults
default only having recently been established and going through a process of acquiring the expertise or working with other organisations, such as the County Council, who ar
defaulte able to assist them. This approach has enabled this initial 
defaultchallenge
default 
defaultto be addressed and provide the basis for establishing effective working relationships at a local level through the sharing of skills and expertise.
default2.6
default              
defaultAn approach that local level 
defaultdecision-making bodies are taking in Hertfordshire, building on the Government’s model, is to engage
default 
defaultwith neighbouring areas to ensure that wider network enhancements are fully understood for the impact they will have on the county. This has additionally e
defaultnabled local statutory bodies to contribute to the 
defaultdevelopment of neighbouring
default Counties’
default plans that are influenced by transport within the county, while in the same regard allowing our neighbours to contribute to the development of Hertfordshire’s.
default&#xa0;
default3.default              defaultDo defaultlocal bodies (including local authorities, local enterprise partnerships, passenger transport executives, integrated transport authorities and local transport boards) have the capacity to assess, prioritise and deliver local transport schemes? What would tdefaulthe optimum delivery body look like?default&#xa0;
default3.1
default              
defaultAs indicated in the answer to our previous questions, the council and other local bodies have been able to manage the recent changes in local decision making on transport expenditure through the sharing of expertise
default in the development of local 
defaulttransport 
defaultplans and priorities.
default 
default3.
default2
default              
defaultLocal Transport Authorities are already 
defaultwell-placed
default 
defaultto
default form the 
defaultfoundation
default 
defaultof local
default 
defaultdelivery bodies. For example, Hertfordshire County Council 
defaulthas, in partnership with local bodies, the capacity to assess and prioritise local transport schemes, and has a demonstrable record in the ability to manage and deliver projects on time and budget. This includes, for example, working with a number of local
default partners to deliver 
defaultschemes such as 
defaultthe 
defaultBaldock Bypass and Royston Rail Crossing
default.
default 
default3.3
default              
defaultThe Local Transport Body model is therefore a good starting point for an optimum delivery body in that it contains both a clear democratically-elected accountable body 
default(i.e. the Local Transport Authority), and contains all the relevant partners required to identify, prioritise and deliver transport schemes.
default4.default              defaultWhat is the best way of dealing with major transport schemes that cross local authority boundaries or have widerdefault regional impact?default&#xa0;default4.1
default              
defaultT
defaulthe council and 
defaultits local 
defaultpartners have been engaging with neighbouring local decision-making bodies
default on specific schemes that impact on both 
defaultourselves and the neighbouring c
defaultouncil(s) in question
default.
default4.2
default              
defaultThe council 
defaulttherefore 
defaultbelieves th
defaultat the best approach should be
default neig
defaulth
defaultbouring
default local bodies forming 
defaultscheme-specific
default 
defaultdelivery
default groups based on functional economic/travel to work areas to address the impact of
default specific
default 
defaultscheme 
defaultproposal
defaults
default on wider travel patterns.
default An example is the delivery group
default formed to deliver Croxley Rail Link, which comprises both Hertfordshire authorities and London-based transport authorities.
default5.default              defaultHow effectively do local bodies work with each other and with Government departments and national transport agencies?default&#xa0;
default5.1
default              
defaultThe County Council considers that it works well with local bodies and the Department for Transport. 
defaultThe devolution of transport funding to local decision-making bodies has provided further opportunities for the council and partner local organisation to bui
defaultld on existing relationships to develop closer working relationships and the sharing of best practice, skills and expertise. This has also supported a closer working relationship with Government departments and agencies
default.
default 
defaultIt should be 
defaultacknowledged
default that
default 
defaultther
defaulte is an increased demand on the Government 
defaultduring this time 
defaultwhen local bodies are seeking clarity and guidance in trying to understand the evolving mechanisms
default for local transport funding
default,
default and
default there is
default 
defaultsubsequently a 
defaultclear
default 
defaultchallenge for Government
default 
defaultregarding
default 
defaultthe amount of 
defaultsupportive
default 
defaultresource 
defaultthat
default 
defaultits
default 
defaultdepartments and agencies are able to contribute 
defaultto
default 
defaultlocal level
defaults
default when there is a wide-spread national demand for greater engagement
default, guidance
default and input.
default6.default              defaultDo the current funding streams for major local transport defaultschemes meet the needs of local authorities? How do current funding streams compare with previous arrangements?default&#xa0;
default6.1
default              
defaultWhile a significant amount of funding 
defaultis being
default 
defaultallocated through the Single Local Growth Fund
default to enable local decision-making bodies to imp
defaultlement a wide and cross-cutting number of measures
default across all sectors
default, there is a concern that without any 
defaultspecific 
defaultring-fenc
defaulting for
default transport that this could place networks under greater pressure in the medium to long-term
default if transport schemes are not prioritised 
defaultin Strategic Economic Plans
default. 
defaultWhilst nationally t
defaulthe level of funding that has been allocated
default for major schemes
default 
defaultwil
defaultl
default be
default 
defaultmore per annum 
defaultfrom 2015/16 
defaultthan 
defaultprevious 
defaultyears
default, the level of funding that is available 
defaultmay stil
defaultl
default 
defaultnot allow for the future development of 
defaultlarge 
defaultprojects 
defaultneeded for sub-national or national reasons in a local area, 
defaultwithout severely impacting on the funding of other local priority
default schemes in that
default area.
default6.2
default              
defaultThe Government may want to consider the develo
defaultpment of an additional supplementary funding stream that would support the delivery of projects that have wider sub-national or national benefits. Alternatively, the Government may want to consider the development of an additional supplementary fund that c
defaultould act as ‘pump priming’ for infrastructure of this scale, that could be re-paid from 
defaulta locally agreed mechanism (e.g.
default 
defaultthrough increased revenue that the
default infrastructure would be anticipated to 
defaultrecoup
default)
default. The latter suggestion places a significant financial
default burden onto one local delivery partnership, and so may only want to be considered where a number of local decision-mak
defaulters
default have indicated support for the proposal. This would, however, lead to a significant risk in delivering the required large scale infra
defaultstructure where neighbouring local priorities conflicted with those at a local, sub-national and national level.
default7.default              defaultWhat impact will the devolution in 2015 of funding to Local Transport Bodies and the introduction of the Single Local Growth Fund have?default&#xa0;
default7.1
default              
defaultThe impact of the devolution of funding to LTBs and the introduction of the SLGF to LEPs is primarily providing greater decision making and accountability at a local level. The impact of the SLGF itself will enable funding to be prioritised by local bodie
defaults to address key 
defaulteconomic 
defaultissues that impact residents and organisations at a local level and to support the growth, prosperity and wellbeing of those living and working in Hertfordshire.
default It should be noted however that 
defaultlocal 
defaulttransport schemes are not alwa
defaultys designed solely to support economic growth, and the County Council’
defaults Local Transport P
defaultlan also advocates the delivery of measures to improve health, improve air quality, reduce accidents and reduce carbon emissions. There will still be a need to fund th
defaultese 
defaulttypes of 
defaultscheme, even if they don’t necessarily achieve the 
defaulteconomic 
defaultgoals of the SLGF
default, and therefore funding should be retained to allow for this
default.
default7.2
default              
defaultThe primary concern with the devolution of funding is the potential limitations this may place on to
default the ability to deliver large infrastructure projects of sub-national and/or national importance. Without additional funding sources from local government, it becomes important for decision-making bodies, for example LTBs and LEPs, to be able to ‘bank’ mon
defaultey and to ‘save’ for the delivery of large infrastructure between funding periods without pressure from Government or its departments and agencies.
default8.default              defaultHow can local authorities attract greater investment from the private sector for the delivery and maintendefaultance of local transport infrastructure? What scope is there for the use of alternative funding streams?default&#xa0;
default8.1
default              
defaultAn
default effective way for local authorities to attract private sector investment is through supporting a sustainable level of growth and securing fundin
defaultg through S106/CIL arrangements. The council has also been successful in securing investment from private sector transport operators by securing matched-funding, in particular the LSTF award has enabled partnership working with Arriva in 
defaultWatford
default. Following
default the council’s investment of the LSTF in 
defaultWatford
default to improve public transport infrastructure and the development of a Quality Network Partnership, Arriva invested almost £1.1 million that supported the delivery of 10 new buses. By working effectively with p
defaultrivate sector partners, local authorities should be able to secure third party funding where they are supporting improvements to services that provide mutual benefits.
default8.2
default              
defaultAdditional alternative funding sources that have the potential to provide greater co
defaultllaboration within the public and private sector include working with health care professionals and organisations to support healthier lifestyle choices.
default9.default              defaultHow clear are the lines of accountability for local decision making on transport expenditure?default&#xa0;
default9.1
default              
defaultT
defaulthe lines of accountability for local decision making on transport expenditure
default, in particular the Single Local Growth Fund,
default are still being developed
default,
default as polices and strategies of local decision-making bodies
default (e.g. the LEP’s Strategic Economic Plan)
default are be
defaulting developed
default and the emerging guidance from Government is being formulated
default. However, in general, this
default work
default 
defaultin Hertfordshire 
defaultis progressing to ensure that accountability is clear between delivery partners, stakeholders, and local residents and businesses.
default 
defaultWithin these arrangements, it is important that there is a clear accountable body, which has a democratic mandate to take decisions.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2
default013
default6
default&#xa0;
default