&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence Submitted by The Children’s Book Project for Tanzania (CBP)defaultExecutive SummerydefaultHigh quality education for all children including disabled in their first years of schooling builds a foundation for future learning and for healthy and productive family and civic life. 
defaultLiteracy skills equip a person to both gain knowledge and understandi
defaultng of their immediate environment as well as to make sense of the wider world. Research shows that a child who is able to read and write is better able to contribute to his or her personal and community well being. 
defaultPrimary Education Development Plan (PEDP
default III), Big Results Now (BRN) and 
defaultLANES
default proposal firmly recognizes the importance of education to support literacy development, to ensure better lives for the Tanzanians including people with disabilities. But the cha
defaultllenges are many including semi-
defaulttrained 
defaultteachers for literacy, lack of Braille reading materials to read, besides having few textbooks transcribed into Braille.
defaultThe CBP
default’s
default experience
default in Braille Book provision
default is in line with the DFID
default’s
default missi
defaulton to support disabled children and youths to improve th
defaulteir lives, and prepare them to become responsible citizens 
defaulti
defaultn their communities.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1.0default&#xa0; 
defaultIntroductiondefaultThe Children’s Book Project
default for Tanzania (CBP) is a local N
defaulton – Governmental 
defaultO
defaultrganization whose main goals are to cultivate a strong reading culture 
defaultamong children in Tanzania through the provision of books t
defaulto children for 
defaultthe purpose
default of increasing and widen
defaulting their knowledge and develop
defaulting their reading skills; for the teaching of literacy and support for reading 
defaultin the formal education system throug
defaulth in – service training of teachers and supporting indigenous authorship and publishing.
default&#xa0;
default2.0default&#xa0; 
defaultDescription of CBP ActivitiesdefaultCBP programme has three main components which include:
defaultCBP implements a professional development for 
defaultTrainers. This
default 
defaultis 
defaultled
default by CBP’s experienced staff. Trainers are trained for 15 days divided into three 5 – day workshop sessions spread out
default over 8 months. 
defaultIn addition to training of teachers, CBP provides reading materials to help children learn to read and develop life – long habits of reading. Schools are supplied with reading materials and 
defaultteachers are
default given training in library management and in reading p
defaultromotion
default.
defaultCBP provides book sector training to publishers, writers, illustrators and editors, with the aim of development professional skills to them hence improving the quality of the books produced.
default3.0 defaultProvisiondefault 
defaultof Braille Books fordefault Visually Impaired Childrendefault.defaultRationale for the Project
defaultIn 1994 CBP organized a Children’s Book Day at the National Library. Among the invited children where visually impaired children from Uhuru Mchanganyiko, in
default Ilala District
default, Dar es Salaam region. The children 
defaultperformed
default a poem which raised their voice that they were being neglected in CBP’s book project 
defaultactivities, while normal ch
defaultildren were provided with books
default.
defaultThe children raised their concern that, they had very few textbo
defaultoks in Braille and there were no reading books. 
defaultFollowing the request, CBP embarked on a programme of producing Braille books for visually impaired children. Those were the first readers ever produced for visually impaired children in the countr
defaulty
default.
default To-date
default 
defaultCBP has transcribed
default 37 story books for visually impaired 
defaultchildren. The
default books have been distributed to 25 schools which cater for the disabled children.
defaultCurrently there are more than 2,000 visually impaired children in primary schools in Tanzania. Among th
defaultem are two specials namely Bwigili in Dodoma region and 
defaultFuraha in 
defaultTab
defaultora region. There are also integrated schools which are Uhuru Mchanganyiko in Dar es Salaam,Mazinyungu in Morogoro region and another one in Lushoto, the rest are inclusive schools.
default&#xa0;
default4.0 defaultChallengesdefaultChildren
defaultTeachers
default&#xa0;default5.0 defaultRecommendeddefault ActivitiesdefaultCBP will carry out needs assessment to 
defaultdetermine the actual number of visually impaired children who are in primary schools in Tanzania. The number of visually impaired children will determine the print run of the Braille books to be produced and distributed to schools. Apart from getting this 
defaultcrucial information, the project will be informed on the list of schools with such children and number of tutors and teachers available for these children. The information will support project planning.
default2.
default defaultTraining of Trainers
default S
defaultelected
default a
default number of tuto
defaultrs 
defaultfrom the colleges which train 
defaultteachers for
default visually impaired children and train them on how to teach effective literacy skills .and prepare them to become trainers and mentors.
default.
default T
defaultrain teachers through in- service teacher training through 
defaultTrain the tra
defaultiner model.
default. The initiative i
defaults focusing on 
defaultenabling 
defaultteachers
default to acquire book management
default 
defaultskills
default of Braille books, and provide them with basic librarian skills, a
defaultnd also on how to incorporate reading materials into instructional strategies of th
defaulteir school culture through library development and instructional prac
defaulttice.
default.
defaultThe Braille book provision i
defaultnitiative strongly supports PED
defaultP
default III which states the necessity for school libraries and supplementary materials 
defaultto support 
defaultlearning and teaching.
defaultProvision of Braille Books to 
defaultintegrated
default schools which cater for visually
default impaired
default children 
defaultand 
defaultinclusive
default schools 
defaultwill 
defaultsupport instruction strategies, literacy development and learning outcomes. These materials will support the quali
defaultty of education, the country’s literacy development and nurture children’s lifelong habits of reading during a formative period of learning.
defaultCBP has participated in the preparation of the government (Ministry of Education and Vocational Training) proposal 
defaulton Literacy and Numeracy (LANES) to the Global Partners Education (GPE) which has been approved. The proposal to GPE did not
default neither
default accommodate an activity for provision of reading 
defaultbooks 
defaultto both normal and visually impaired children nor establishment of s
defaultchool libraries
default.
defaultFurthermore, the new presidential Initiative Big Results Now (BRN) and the PEDP III activities did not also accommodate the same. In this respect CBP is appealing to DFID to take the 
defaultresponsibility to provide Braille Books to improve the c
defaulthildren’s outcome and eventually contribute to improving the quality education.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default