&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from
default defaultXpede
default Medical Ltd
default (CMI0024)
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultI am writing to you as the owner of a small fledgling medical legal company.  My business has 
defaultjust at the end of November 2013 completed its 3
defaultrd
default financial year.
default Since September 2012 I started to employ 1 person on a part time basis and this is a working mum who, I am pleased to say, has given up claiming tax credit due to the earnings she is making
default by working for Xpede Medical Ltd. I am very happy and proud of this fact and it pleases me immensely as I know all the parties in the political arena would class this as a small success story.
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, m
defaulty main reason for writing to you is to air my conce
defaultrns about the intended implementation 
defaultof Independent Experts panel. At the moment the indications are that there could possibly be a tender process requesting interested medical legal agencies to bid for the tender.
defaultThis proc
defaultess would 
defaultmean small startup co
defaultmpanies such as mine will have to spend tens of thousands of pounds just to prepare to run for the tender process and definitely small companies like mine will close down
default leaving only the big companies
default, including the ones owned by PI solicitor firms
default,
default to ru
defaultn for tender.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe second option I have heard which is being considered, is that both agencies and medical experts 
defaultmay 
defaulthave to be accredited in order to carry out medical legal
default work
default.
defaultWhilst I completely agree that experts
default’
default should 
defaultreceive comprehensive trai
defaultning and 
defaultaccredit
defaultation 
defaultin order to provide more quality reports I am again wary of the costs which will be involved for small business
defaultes 
default to obtain accreditation if this is to be the chosen method.  
defaultWill the costs to small medical agencies be considered? 
defaultWill there be any exceptions for small medical agencies cost wise etc?
default&#xa0;
defaultMy understanding is that the whole purpose of this exercise is to reduce whiplash injuries and this will be achieved by obtaining more independent reports. But if the larger companies,
default especially the ones owned by PI solicitors or their friends/families are able to jump through all these hoops as cost will not be a consideration for them, then all that this exercise will do is put smaller bona fide medical legal agencies out of business
default and yet the very people who 
defaultyou are aiming to 
defaultmonitored will be free to carry on as normal.
default&#xa0;
defaultMy suggestion would be 
defaultto adopt some of the following practices
default:
default&#xa0;
defaultI hope my concerns 
defaultwill be 
defaulttaken on board and 
defaultalso hope that my suggestions are of some help to you in your decision making process.
defaultI am more than happy to speak to anyone
default in order to discuss the above points further. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI look forward to receiving 
defaultdetails of the next steps.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default