&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr. Rebecca Dingo, Associate Professor at the University of Missouridefault, USAdefault.defaultExecutive Summary:
defaultIntroduction:
default[1] 
defaultI am an Associate Professor with tenure in Women’s and Gender Studies at the University of Missouri, USA. I write as a 
defaultscholar/
defaultresearcher who 
defaulthas spent the last 10 years examining global gender and disability policy arguments and development programmatic plans developed by international organizations such as the United Nations and the World Bank, national governments, and NGOs.  I am trained in 
defaultgender
default and development, transnational and international feminisms, and rhetorical methods. 
defaultI also have experience working in the newly 
defaultestablished 
defaultinternational
default 
defaultscholarly field of disability s
defaulttudies.  
defaultThis training and my research has a
defaultfforded me an 
defaultimportant
default birds-eye view of various development progr
defaultam outcomes across the world; I
default make recommendations based on looking at outcome trends across these programs. My scholarship has addressed the relationship between language used in development policy an
defaultd 
defaultprograms and their material outcomes.  
default[2] 
defaultM
defaulty response importantly takes seriously that the language we use to describe and promote development
default agendas,
default goals
default,
default and plans has a deep history and often conjures up specific ideological meanings beyond what 
defaultan author
default/committee
default may (or may not) intend. 
defaultFor example,
default notions of “normalcy” and “disability” are not formed by objective fact but through discourse—or any spoken or written language in use as a social practice. Discourses draw from ideologies that are 
defaultoften unquestioned and presumed to be naturalized and commonsense. 
defaultThis means that when people use words such as 
default“
defaultnormalcy
default,”
default 
default“
defaultdisability
default, “mainstreaming,” and “inclusion”
default they draw upon
default 
defaultcommonplace social ideas that are deeply tied to longstanding social b
defaulteliefs. 
defaultA
defaults disability scholar, 
defaultJong-Gu Kang 
default(2009) 
defaultexplains
default discourses of disability are power-laden con
defaultstructs that privilege the able-bodied/mind
default majority
default and their ways of being
default. 
defaultIn short, disability is a social construct rather than a natural fact and steps need to be taken to analyze a communities’ normative interpretation of bodily difference 
default(Foley, 2009) 
defaultbecause disability is
default 
default“
defaultimplicit in cultural representation, in language a
defaultnd in socialization" (Shakespeare, 1994
default) and
default 
default“
defaultour realities revolve around the culturally ascribed dominate meanings of differences and how they irrevocably impact lives
default”
default (Gallagher, 2001).
default[3] 
defaultFor this reason
default, I also take seriously that notions of what is
default a disability and what is not 
defaulta disability 
defaulttends to manifest
default in language as 
defaulttaken-for-granted 
defaultobjective fact
default. 
defaultWidely held
default perceptions
default of disability have persisted (albeit such discourses subtly change throughout time) through social, political, cultural, a
defaultnd even economic and geopolitical interactions and arrangements. As a result, policies and programs may promote ways of thinking and ways of practicing that continue to misunderstand and misrepresent the needs of 
defaultpeople with disabilities (PWD)
default, stigmatize 
defaultthem,
default and ultimately disempower them.
default 
default[4] 
defaultDisability Studies scholars tend shun the medical model of disability that 
defaultspeaks of and treats
default disability as a pa
defaultthology to cure or overcome (
defaulte.g. Garland-Thompson
default, 2005
default)
default. T
defaulthis model tends to talk about individual “impairments,” “cures,” “deficiencies,” and “illness”, for example, over 
defaultthe socio-culturally negative attitudes and stigmas and the political, and 
defaultphysical 
defaultsystemic barriers that are the main contributing factors i
defaultn disabling people
default. While mainstreaming and inclusion policies do not necessarily promote a medical model, they do emphasize that a PWD must fit into the mainstream instead of the mainstream changing to fit them. 
defaultDisability studies also draws attention to 
defaultthe fact that 
defaultPWD
default 
defaultenhance our communities not only through their participation
default in public life, 
defaultbut also by demonstrating alternative means of
default being and doing
default that are often useful for the wider community (e.g. wheelchair ramps help people pushing children 
defaultin strollers and people who have short-term leg or knee injuries and can prevent knee injuries; lights at corners that beep and have visual cues help all people cross the street more safely). 
default&#xa0;
default[5] 
defaultAs a result, disability studies scholars and activists ten
defaultd to embrace a social-cultural view of disability as just another part of the diversity of the human condition
default. They point out that 
defaultmany of us who are
default currently
default able bodied, 
defaultwill
default become disabled later
default as we age
default and then become dependent on our communities for care
default. 
default 
defaultT
defaulthey also promote that the notion of  “disability” is, of and in itself, a cultural construct or 
defaultinterpretation that
default often varies across time, 
defaultplace
default, and situation
default.  
defaultThis final point is crucial to my
default recommendations and comments on mainstreaming and inclusion programs because it draws attention to how current geopolitical arrangements 
defaultimpact how we understand and create disability and development programs and why they are often unsustainable for the d
defaultevelopment organizations and 
defaultPWD
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultBackground
default &amp; Evidence
default:
default 
default[6] 
defaultM
defaultainstreaming and inclusion 
defaultmay 
defaultappear to be viable 
defaultdevelopment 
defaultstrategies
default 
defaultfor alleviating poverty among 
defaultPWD because 
defaultthey attempt to put PWD on equal footing and with equal treatment with peo
defaultple with
defaultout disabilities.  Yet
default, 
defaultresearch of
default several disab
defaultility and development 
defaultinitiatives
default across t
defaulthe world suggest that programs
default promoting only mainstreaming and inclusion do not get at the heart of why 
defaultPWD
default 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultcomprise 20% (U.N. 2006) of those in poverty across the world. 
defaultThe background and evidence I offer does not come from on-the-ground calculated data as many policy briefs and analyses do. As my article, “Making the Unfit, Fit” makes clear, development pract
defaultitioners must be careful of the language they use so that they do not continue to forward the very conditions that constrain PWD ability to part
defaulticipate in their communities
default 
defaultand
default they must be mindful of the geopolitical contexts that impact PWD’s local circu
defaultmstances
default.  
defaultFor this reasons, I wish to highlight three problems I have with some mainstreaming and inclusion models:
default[7] 
defaultThese
default models
default can further 
defaultproduce 
defaultstigma against 
defaultPWD
default since the onus to enter the mainstream in these programs is often constructed as a choice to be made by a PWD who may already have constrained choices due to the aforementioned pr
defaultoblems
default.
default  Crucially
default, a
defaults disability studies 
defaultscholar Harlan Han 
default(1997) 
defaultmakes clear, “the unemployment rate of disabled adults may be traced to broad economic forces rather than
default individual impairments” (p. 17
default). 
defaultHan’s
default findings 
defaulthighlight the need to look beyond impairment and 
defaultdemonstrates the importance for development programs to recognize and promote 
defaultunderstanding disability through 
defaultthe social model
default-- 
defaultand even what I would
default describe as a contextual model--
default 
defaultby identifying and cre
defaultating programs that confront 
defaultsystematic barriers
default (physical, social, cultural, economic
default,
default and geopolitical),
default negative attitudes, and social exclusion (purposefully or inadvertently)
default to 
defaultpublic participation
default. 
default[8] Moreover, the social model of disability sugge
defaultsts that attempts to fix or cure the disability without addressing how the wider community
default 
defaulttreats 
defaultPWD
default can lead to further stigma and even social exclusion 
defaulteven while attempting to be inclusive
default. When 
defaultPWD
default are constantly being told their bodies/minds and ways
default of being need to change to be included into the mainstream this can cause low self-esteem
default on the part of the 
defaultPWD
default and continued stigmatization
default by people without disabilities
default. 
defaultSuch thinki
defaultng also crucially ignores
default the social, 
defaultgeo
defaultpolitical, and economic reaso
defaultns that 
defaultPWD
default are unable to participate fully in the mainstream
default (Meekosha
default, 2011
default)
default.  
default[9] 
defaultMainstreaming and inclusion policies tend to focus on 
defaultthe individual with a disability being able be a part of a mainstream community
default instead of 
defaultaddressing 
defaultthe way that social and economic factors and practices are what actually makes a person disabled.  
defaultThese social and economic factors vary across locale, region, and nation.  
defaultIn contrast, the social/contextual model of disability
default see
defaults
default that people can become
default disabled by a lack of resources to meet their needs.  These resources can be monetary but they can also include
default[10] 
defaultIn Karr’s 
default(2011) 
defaultcomparative
default study of 
defaultQOL
default 
defaultindicators
default 
defaultfor PWD 
defaultin three different 
defaultcountries with very different his
defaulttories and geopolitical relationships
default (the US, Nepal, and Zambia) she found that 
defaultgenerally across
default 
defaulteach country 
defaultPWD
default indicated that access 
defaultto 
defaultcommunities/structures 
defaultthat allow 
defaultPWD
default to practice self-determination and that value 
defaultPWD
default ability to use their resources and knowledge capacity to pursue their interests
default ranked as the highest indicator
defaults
default for 
defaultQOL
default.  
default[11] 
defaultYet, 
defaultQOL
default can differ across culture
default and 
defaultQOL
default can be affected by local 
defaultcircumstances
default.  
defaultIn Western countries that value independen
defaultce, QOL may include living in their own homes, in 
defaultregions that value collectivity, QOL may mean participating in community decision making.  
defaultFor this reason,
default I advocate for a slight revision of the social model of disability that I call the contextual mode
defaultl
default of disability
default.  
default[12] 
defaultThis 
defaultcontextual 
defaultmodel follows 
defaultboth feminist approaches to political economy and transnational practices (Dingo
default 2012
default) and 
defaultMeek
defaultosha’s 
default(2011) 
defaultstudy of indigeneity, disability, and colonialism in Australia
default. It also
default 
defaulttakes 
defaultthe following 
defaultinto account 
default[13] 
defaultDisability activist and scholar Helen
default 
defaultMeekosha 
default(2011) 
defaultstates, “Disability is produced in the violence a
defaultnd war that is provoked by the North, either directly or indirectly, [and] in the struggle over the control of miner
defaultals, oil and economic resources
default”
default (668).
default 
defaultFor example, i
defaultn regions of Central Africa where precious metals are mined, for example, people have 
defaultlittle choice in work and that work is often dangerous, poorly paid, and produces disabilities 
defaultthrough work conditions, poverty, 
defaultand violence. 
default 
defaultIn other words,
default 
defaults
defaultimply speaking about mainstreaming and including 
defaultPWD
default,
default does not get the wider contexts of poverty
default.  For 
defaultthis reason, Meekosha
default (2011)
default suggests
default paying attention to “social suffering in order to understand “disabling and distressing events that have occurred on large and communal scale” 
default(p. 670) 
defaultin 
defaultpoor nations.
default She advocates the development of frameworks and measurements for 
defaultunderstand
defaulting
default 
defaultand addressing 
defaultthe collective sufferings of the world’s 
defaultpoorest 
defaultdisabled peoples
default.
default[14] 
defaultL
defaultastly, in relationship to social and contextual models of disability,
default the practice and d
defaultiscourse of mainstreaming and inclusion have both material and linguistic constrains that directly impact 
defaultPWD
default and can lead to short-sighted development programs
default over long-term sustainable development
default.  
defaultPost the 2004 Disability and Development conference hosted by the World Bank, 
defaultdisability activists began to have a formal presence on the World Bank’s Disability and Development website.  Since then there has been a notable recognition how stigma works on 
defaultmany levels ranging from language practices and their work on the psyche to actual fu
defaultnding opportunities for PWD.  For example, as
default noted in an article by 
defaultFlavia Nakabuye Bwire, George Mukasa, 
defaultand 
defaultRoy Mersland
default (2009), notions of mainstreaming and inclusion 
defaultcannot work if there is not work on the social and cultural stigmas against PWD.  
defaultIn
default their study of a Ugandan microlending d
defaultevelopment initiative they show
default how despite the intentions of “mainstreaming” PWD into micro-lending programs, for example, prevaili
defaultng ideologies about PWD kept lenders from reaching out to this population.  Likewise, if they did, lenders tended to make special programs for PWD and in doing so privileged microlending plans that were unsustainable 
defaultfor the person taking the loan 
defaultonce the
default loan period ended. Notably, they found that many banks and 
defaultlending 
defaultNGOs chose not to lend to PWD because they believed the following: 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default[15] 
defaultAlong these same lines, because many microlending agencies rely upon solidarity groups or village banks, due to stigmatization, local community members also believed th
defaultese same stigmas and discouraged agencies from reaching out to PWD.  As Bwire et als
default (2009)
default, make clear in their findings, such stigmas not only limit important business opportunities for the wider community and the lending agency, they also “
defaultfail to pract
defaultice the double bottom line policy of reaching both financial and social objectives, which nearly all 
defaultmicro-finance agencies
default claim
default”
default 
defaultto be part of. 
defaultA contextual model of 
defaultdisability
default takes into account how mainstreaming and inclusion programs 
defaultmust address wide
defaultr contexts, such as addressing how a community talks about and makes presumptions about PWD within local contexts. 
defaultThe 
defaultUganda project 
defaultwas somewhat successful because
default the program 
defaultrelied on community members (some with disabilities)
default to actually 
defaulttrain lenders
default how 
defaultto
default interact with 
defaultPWD
default. This program was unique because it worked against common practices of mainstreaming and inclusion of PWD and instead focused on the changing the mainstream to be more inclusive. 
defaultRecommendations:
default[16] 
defaultSince the World Bank’s 2004 
defaultDisabil
defaultity and Development conference
default, long-term studies examining disability and development initiatives out of specific countries such as Bangladesh, India, Uganda, Serbia, the US, Nepal, Australia, Zambia, and Cuba (to name a few) 
defaultindicate
default that programs
default that merely employ mainstreaming and inclusion efforts often re-marginalize 
defaultPWD
default.  
defaultSuch
default programs promote 
defaultmainstreaming 
defaultwork and education related activities that target the people with the disability
default.
default 
default Yet, these programs
default 
defaultdo 
defaultnot 
defaultaddress
default:
default[17] 
defaultThese all impact
default the physical and mental environment of people with and without disabilities. Moreover, the sorts of 
defaultmainstreaming and inclusion 
defaultwork activities available to 
defaultpeople in poor nations can be dang
defaulterous and create more disabilities
default and/or are dangerous for 
defaultPWD
default. 
defaultBased on a birds-eye-view of disab
defaultility and development programs
default 
defaultthis evidence submission
default has
default fo
defaultcused
default on shifting programs
default away from a sole focus on mainstre
defaultaming, inclusion, and rehabilitation 
defaultof 
defaultPWD
default 
defaultand instead to emphasize the following:
default 
defaultDisability and development programs should
default[18] 
defaultMainstreaming and inclusion initiatives tend to emphasize the need for people disabilities to change themselves so that they can participate equally with peopl
defaulte who do not have disabilities.
default Such priorities place the onus for 
defaultPWD
default to develop skills and habits on par with their non-disabled community members.  And in most cases, due to physical or psychological barriers, people with disability are (like many who are marginalized) are unable to 
defaultparticipate in the mainstream on equal footing without significant changes to the environment and to ideologies and expectations about “normal” ways of being verses “abnormal” ways of being.  In some cases, programs that have only emphasized work or educat
defaultion related activities and microloans aimed to teach 
defaultPWD
default how to participate in the formal labor sector, have resulted in further stigmatization.  Such plans in and of themselves are not wholly problematic but they miss the fact that the people without disa
defaultbilities that people with whom 
defaultPWD
default interact may hold deeply ingrained stigmas against those 
defaultPWD
default. Simply providing formal work and educational opportunities to 
defaultPWD
default makes it easy for NGOs, microlenders, and development practitioners to continue to marginaliz
defaulte (via their expectations
default and ignoring of contextual issues
default) 
defaultPWD
default in these settings.  Likewise, stigma operates deep in the psyche and is often reinforced by language and ideology so that even development experts, NGO practitioners, and micolenders might pr
defaultesume that 
defaultPWD
default have not cultivated important educational expertise, knowledge, abilities, or practices that might already make them employable, able to pay back loans, begin businesses, and participate in their communities.  
defaultCitations:
defaultBwire,
default F.N.
default Mukasa
default,
default G.
default, 
defaultand 
defaultMersland
default, R. 
defaultAccess to Mainstream Microfinance Services 
defaultfor Persons with Disabilities — Lessons Learned from Uganda. 
defaultDisability Studies Quarterly, 29 
default(1). 
defaultRetrieved from http://dsq-sds.org/article/view/168/168.
defaultDingo, R. A. (2012). 
defaultNetworking 
defaultarguments: rhetoric, transnational feminism, and public policy writing
default. Pittsburgh, Pa.: University of Pittsburgh Press.
defaultFoley, D. (2009). 
defaultThe Contextual and Cultural Barriers to Equity and Full Inclusive Participation for People Labeled with Disabilities 
defaultin Bangladesh. 
defaultDisability Studies Quarterly,
default 29 (1). Retrieved from 
defaulthttp://dsq-sds.org/article/view/170/170
default.
defaultGallagher, D. (2001). Neutrality as a moral standpoint, conceptual confusion and the full i
defaultnclusion debate. 
defaultDisability and Society
default, 16, 637-654.
defaultGarland
default‐
defaultThomson, R. (2005). Feminist Disability Studies. 
defaultSigns: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
default, 
default30
default(2), 1557-1587.
defaultHahn, H. (1997). Advertising the Acceptably Employable Image: Disability and Capitalism. 
defaultThe Disability Studies Reader. 
defaultNew York: Routledge.
defaultKang, 
defaultG
default. (2009).
default A Teacher's Deconstruction of Disability: A Discourse Analysis
default. 
defaultDisability Studies Quarterly, 29 
default(
default9). Retrieved from 
defaulthttp://dsq-sds.org/article/view/173/173
default.
defaultKarr, V. L. (2011). A Life of Quality: Informing the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons With Disabilities. 
defaultJournal of Disability Policy 
defaultStudies
default, 
default22
default(2), 67-82.
defaultMeekosha, H. (2011). Decolonising Disability: Thinking And Acting Globally. 
defaultDisability &amp; Society
default, 
default26
default(6), 667-682.
defaultReindal, S. M. (1999). Independence, Dependence, Interdependence
default: Some Reflections On The Subject And Personal Autonomy. 
defaultDisability &amp; Society
default, 
default14
default(3), 353-367.
defaultShakespeare, T. (1994). Cultural representation of disabled people: Dustbins for disavowal? 
defaultDisability and Society
default, 9(3), 283-299.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default This evidence submission benefitted from feedback from Jay Dolmage
default at the University of Waterloo in Canada, Rachel Riedner at George Washington University in the US, and Jennifer Wingard at the University of Houston in the US.  
default