&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaulttecUK ‘Radio’ default[FBB0089]defaultIntroductiondefaultThis response was formatted with and on behalf of the UK’s digital radio manufacturer community. We have chosen to answer the question posed by the inquiry we felt most directly relevant to our relationship with the BBC, and influential upon the UK Radio v
defaultalue chain. We have also submitted a similar response to the same question focusing on the UK TV industry, garnering views from our consumer electronics members who supply digital TV technology to the UK market. 
defaultAbout techUKdefaulttechUK represents the compan
defaulties and technologies that are defining today the world that we will live in tomorrow. More than 850 companies are members of techUK. Collectively they employ more than 500,000 people, about half of all tech sector jobs in the UK. These companies range from
default leading FTSE 100 companies to new innovative start-ups. The majority of our members are small and medium sized businesses.
defaultWhat role should the BBC play in developing technology and new ways of distributing content?defaultExecutive Summarydefault• The BBC has a ke
defaulty role to play in ensuring UK radio’s successful transition to a digital future.
default• Digital switchover will benefit both consumers and broadcasters:
default- for consumers - greater choice, additional added value services and the opportunity for improved recepti
defaulton
default- for broadcasters - encouraging innovation and removing the cost of broadcasting on both FM and DAB.
default• The setting of a date for DSO will be “consumer-led”, but can only be enabled if national DAB coverage is comparable to FM, with local DAB reaching
default 90% of the population (both at a static location and on the move on all major roads). It is critical that the BBC plays an active role in achieving both these objectives before switchover can be achieved.
defaultThe provision of consumer friendly and cost effect
defaultive solutions to convert the 25million plus cars on British roads with analogue only radios remains the major challenge in achieving an environment conducive to switchover. Currently an easily implemented, cost effective and acceptable quality solution is 
defaultnot in reach of the average motorist. One major problem for DAB to FM in-car converters is the lack of clear FM frequencies on which the converted DAB channels can be presented to the FM in-car receiver. A possible solution is the provision of a national c
defaultlear frequency on which these devices can transmit. We urge the BBC to take an active role in delivering a solution to this problem which, if unaddressed, will have a major impact on the timing of FM to DAB switchover.
default• As with the transition to digital 
defaultTV, the BBC should take a well-funded, pro-active role in educating and informing consumers about the benefits to digital radio (in-home, out-of-home and in-car). 
default- activity should include building awareness and understanding of the proposed Digital Tick scheme for domestic and automotive digital radio devices 
default- as with digital TV, the BBC should fund and manage a Help Scheme for vulnerable groups.
default• An explicit 
defaultpart of the BBC’s remit should be to continue to work in partnership with other players in the radio ecosystem to ensure that the sector as whole effectively addresses the challenges of new technology. Examples of current good practice include industry bod
defaulty Digital Radio UK (DRUK) and online listening service Radioplayer. Collaboration should take place both in the UK and with European and other international partners.
default• Specific areas where collaboration should be focused include: DAB in smartphones, DAB 
defaultin connected cars, hybrid radio (combining broadcast and IP services), and integrated service guides (where FM and DAB services are displayed in a single user interface).
defaultReason for submissiondefaultThe success of digital radio in the UK is important not only 
defaultfor consumers and broadcasters but also for UK technology providers and device manufacturers. UK technology solutions (chips and modules) power 80% of consumer DAB / DAB+ devices on a worldwide basis. A timely and efficient transition to digital switchover
default will be a strong boost to these UK companies – not only because it will accelerate the growth of the UK market, but also because other countries will be looking at the example set by the UK; these countries in turn could become important export markets fo
defaultr UK manufacturers targeting the digital radio sector.
defaultThe BBC has a critical role to play in the delivery of the successful transition to DSO. It is important that this is clearly articulated in its long term priorities.
defaultBackgrounddefaultSince July 2010, Gov
defaulternment (DCMS) and Ofcom have managed the Government-Industry Digital Radio Action Plan (DRAP) which was launched by Government to help prepare for a future digital radio switchover. Government agrees with the radio industry that digital is the future for 
defaultradio and is considering a switchover because:
default• Listeners prefer digital radio
default• FM is full
default• DAB expands consumer choice
default• Dual transmission on DAB and unfair and inefficient
default&#xa0;
defaultGovernment is due to make an in-principle decision and announcement on a futu
defaultre digital radio switchover on 16 December. Government has said that a switchover must be consumer-led and dates can only be set once local DAB coverage is at 90% and digital listening is at 50%.
default1. Radio’s continuing importance and the growth of digitaldefault radiodefaultRadio is a much-loved medium and is in excellent health, showing remarkable resilience in the digital age. Over 90% each week and radio’s share of audio is 76% (including music services such as Spotify). 
defaultDigital radio is now multi-platform and can be accessed via DAB (the free-to-air terrestrial broadcast platform), online, digital TV and mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets. Currently, listening to digital radio accounts for 35.6% of all listeni
defaultng digital listening, internet for 15% and DTV 15%. 
defaultLatest Rajar figures (Q3 2013) showed:
default• 50.8% of the population tunes in via a digital platform each week, up from 45.6% (in Q3 2012)
default• The share of analogue listening in home is now less than 50%, at 
default49.7%.
default• Digital listening hours are up 14% year on year from 320 million per week to 366 million
default• Digital accounts for 35.6% of all listening, up from 31.3% (Q3 2102)
default• DAB is the most popular device for digital listening (65% of all digital hours) and 
default24 million adults have access to a DAB digital radio, up 10% year on year
default• 46% of homes already have a digital radio – more than Sky or Freeview
default• All platforms show growth in hours, with DAB up 13% year on year, online/apps up 37% and DTV up 7%.
defaultThis 
defaultgrowth has been driven by increasing choice and strong performances from digital-only stations. BBC Radio 5 Live Sports Extra showed a 51% increase in listeners year on year, to over 1.5 million listeners, driven by the popularity of the Ashes coverage. BB
defaultC 6 Music is the no.1 BBC digital-only station with 1.8 million listeners.
default2. The BBC must support a dedicated, free-to-air digital broadcast backbone and end costly dual transmission on analoguedefaultThe BBC should continue to support the Public Purpose of 
default“Delivering to the public the benefit of emerging communications technologies and services” by prioritising the build-out of national and local DAB coverage. This should lead, through a consumer-led switchover process, to the end of costly dual transmissio
defaultn on FM and DAB.
defaultIt is important the UK retains a strong, free-to-air, digital radio broadcast backbone. DAB is the platform to deliver this objective. 
defaultThe BBC recently announced the build-out of national DAB coverage, adding a further 162 transmitters 
defaultby the end of 2015. This will take BBC national DAB coverage from 94% to 97%, approaching FM equivalence. It is also important that this build-out covers all major UK roads.
defaultThe BBC is also finalising an agreement with Government and commercial radio grou
defaultps to fund the build-out of local DAB coverage to 90%. The BBC should ensure that this local build-out is prioritised to meet the digital radio switchover criteria – ideally by the end of 2015.
defaultCurrently the BBC broadcasts BBC Radio 5 Live both on AM and 
defaultDAB digital radio and there would be transmission savings were it to stop broadcasting on AM. Broadcasts on AM provide variable listening quality, especially in the evening. The Government’s Digital Britain White Paper proposed that AM (medium wave frequen
defaultcies) would be switched off, and the services moved to DAB-only, or in the case of ultra-local services, to FM. 
default3. The BBC should support consumer communications about a digital radio switchoverdefaultThe BBC played a significant role in supporting consumers
default through the switchover to digital TV. As well as leading the development of Freeview with other broadcasters, the BBC also established and co-funded Digital UK, the organisation charged with managing the TV switchover. Most importantly, the BBC funded (to
default the tune of £200 million) the public communications campaign which helped build awareness of switchover and ensure consumers were well informed and understood what they had to do and when.
defaultThe digital TV certification mark was used to indicate products a
defaultnd services that were designed to help consumers through a switchover and effective marketing and promotion of this mark was central to the success of TV switchover. 
defaultIt is intended that a similar digital radio certification mark will be launched should a
default future switchover be confirmed later this year. Over the last three years, technical criteria for digital radios have been defined which will ensure a minimum quality experience for listeners. A training programme for in-car digital radio installers has a
defaultlso been developed.
defaultA digital radio certification mark is central to a consumer-led switchover, as it provides a clear indication for consumers (and manufacturers and retailers) on the products to purchase and which services to use. The BBC should play a 
defaultsimilar role as in digital TV switchover by funding and supporting a digital radio certification mark and consumer communications on a digital radio switchover.
defaultAs with TV switchover, it is likely that Government will ensure appropriate support for vulner
defaultable groups who require help through a switchover. The TV switchover help scheme was managed and funded by the BBC at a cost of £300 million but it is not envisaged that a radio switchover help scheme would require the same level of resource. The BBC shoul
defaultd fund and manage a radio help scheme.
default4. The BBC must continue to partner with other broadcastersdefaultThe BBC should aim to work openly with other radio broadcasters to the benefit of UK listeners and the radio industry. DRUK is an example of how the BBC h
defaultas worked closely with commercial radio broadcasters towards a common purpose. 
defaultIn particular, there is an opportunity to work closely on the development of digital technology as it makes sense to agree on technology and compete on content. UK Radioplayer
default, another collaboration between the BBC and commercial radio, allows access to UK radio stations through a single console with a consistent user experience. 
defaultPartnering should not be confined to the UK. The BBC should continue to work with European and gl
defaultobal broadcasters (and others in the radio industry ecosystem) to ensure the deployment of common technology standards. This will help create economies of scale for technology manufacturers and benefit UK consumers
default5. The BBC must lead on developing the nedefaultxt generation of digital radio technologydefaultThe significant experience and R&amp;D resource the BBC has at its disposal means it should, in partnership with other broadcasters, lead on the development of next generation radio technology. In particular, the foll
defaultowing areas should be a priority:
default• Ensuring the inclusion of DAB in smartphones 
default• Development of hybrid radio. Hybrid radio enables broadcast FM/DAB to work together with the internet, providing free-to-air broadcast radio alongside internet content and
default interactivity eg visuals, buy-now. Hybrid radio enables an app-like experience but without the cost of streaming internet radio and could be implemented in domestic radios, in-car and in smartphones.
default• Development of a great radio experience in internet-c
defaultonnected cars and ensuring that radio remains prominent on the dashboard.
default• Promotion of a Sky Plus experience on radio with a full Electronic Programme Guide, series-linking and recording
default• Development of a single, integrated radio experience where listen
defaulters choose content agnostic of which platform it’s on. This so-called integrated station guide is of particular importance to small stations who fear being left on FM as the UK transitions to DAB
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default