&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultCatrionadefault Cook MBEdefault [WAS0046]default&#xa0;defaultWOMEN IN SPORT: RIDERS of HORSESdefaultI have been a voluntary access officer for the British Horse Society (BHS) for some 30 years. In that time I have been made aware that 95% of riders who use the rights of way network for 
defaultriding horses are female. 
default 
defaultPredominately from the lower socieo-economic backgrounds.
default Riding covers all social backgrounds and all age groups, from 3 years old to people in their nineties
default; from the fully fit to the disabled.
defaultThe BHS has produced a very good 
defaultstudy into the benefits of riding for the physical and emotional health of women. Many women want to access the countryside for physical exercise and for their emotional well being. Unlike men, many do not feel safe doing this on their feet alone. But when
default they are on a horse they feel safe to ride out alone unlike walking alone.
defaultMany of our equestrians both the Olympic teams and the para Olympic teams were female. But their sport starts with riding out on rights of way, and even at this top level they stil
defaultl use rights of way as their core exercise facilities. Unfortunately only 22% of the rights of way 
defaultnetwork are
default bridleways, compared with a 100% of the network for walkers. This means that in many areas of the country the only facilities for riders to use a
defaultre the roads.
default Rights of way should be thought of as facilities, like elongated football pitches or swimming pools. They actually cost less public money per metre than these other public facilities.
defaultIf we want girls to take exercise, and many girls ride and
default muck out their ponies etc, then every community in the whole country shou
defaultl
defaultd have a network of byways and bridleways for these children to use. Bridleways are also available to cyclists so female cyclists would also gain.
default Unfortunately the government in al
defaultl recent legislation to do with increased access to the countryside has improved things for walkers at the expense of equestrians.
defaultI feel strongly about this, since as a child the only exercise I took was riding, and I was backward academically. Having had
default success with a pony, I then started to apply it to my school work, where I was only expected to end up in a practical subject, but was motivated to get a degree. Now having had three cancers ten years ago, the medical profession could not understand my ch
defaulteerfulness throughout th
defaulte treatment. But I was again motivated by the work I was doing to extend the equestrian rights of way network for others.
defaultThe UK government should follow the lead of Scotland and make all rights of way available to all non motorised
default users, so that all women and children would have somewhere safe to 
defaulttake exercise with
default their pony or cycle.
defaultCatriona
default Cook MBE
defaultBritish Horse Society (BHS), Yorkshire Regional Access Officer
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default