&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence fdefaultrom The Rt.default defaultHon. Lord Howell of Guildforddefault (USA 17)defaultSummary.default 
defaultIn the re-positioning process now necessitated by a total transformation in the international 
defaultlandscape Britain
default badly needs to recalibrate its relationship with America and with Washington thinking. The language 
defaultnow 
defaultneeds to be that of partnership an
defaultd friendship, not compliance with, 
defaultor 
defaultsubservience
default to, perceived American hegemony. 
default. The essence of the 
defaultchange is
default contained in William Hague’s adage that the transatlantic relationship should be ‘solid, not slavish’.  There is no future at all in having a British leadership that appears intent 
defaulton doing
default everything the USA tells it.   America now lives in a networked world in which the guiding principle has to be ‘partnership’, rather 
defaultthan ‘leadership’
default. This is not yet understood by some policy-makers, either in Washington or London.
defaultPartnership not Leadershipdefaulto
defaultver the last fifteen to twenty years the chorus from the U.S. policy establishment has been one of repeated calls for America re-assume its leadership 
defaultrole in
default world affairs, to take the helm, to reassert the nation’s role as Number One superpower.
defaultThis has been so right across the American political spectrum with leading voices of  Presidential candidates, Presidents, their campaigners and closest advisers all asking the same question – namely, how to get American back in charge, how to reverse foreign policy failure and reputational decline in the Middle East, how to become again THE global leader. 
defaultBut it is the wrong question and it leads to the wrong 
defaultanswers,
default both for the USA and for Britain’s relationship with it. There is no world waiting any longer for a powerful and resurgent America to 
defaultstep forward
default to dominate world affairs and impose its template on every regional and global issue. There is no prepared pedestal for America to climb back on to and raise the torch of freedom and democracy. That world has vanished. ‘An international order that reflects our values’ 
default– the
default words of former Secretary of State 
defaultCondoleeza
default Rice – is not available.
defaultIn a network world
default gone ‘live’ with instant and intense connectivity – of a kind never before matched in human history - 
default 
defaultno-one
default is on top
default or in a position to impose ‘our values’
default. Behaviour patterns on the part 
defaultof any
default nation within the 
defaultnetwork can
default certainly shake the whole system, 
defaultAmerican behaviour
default especially 
defaultso, 
defaultgiven the
default sheer size of the U.S. within the world economy. But national or regional leaders who think that size still translates 
defaultinto command
default and dominance are deluding themselves, and – 
defaultequally worryingly
default - their 
defaultpeoples.
defaultThe delusion lies very deep in American policy. Back in 2008 there was the late Richard Holbrooke calling repeatedly for America to reassume the leadership role in world affairs as the new Obama platform took shape.
default 
default(
defaultForeign Affairs Quarterly
default) There was the arch-realist Henry Kissinger, half sensing the change to a more pluralist world, urging that: 
default‘
defaultwhile traditional patterns are in transition and the very basis of experience and knowledge is being revolutionised, America’s ultimate challenge is to transform its power into moral consensus , promoting its values not by imposition but by their willing acceptance in a world that, for all its seeming resistance, desperately needs enlightened leadership’. 
defaultWith 
defaulthis piercing
default realism Kissinger could not resist adding that ‘
defaultAmerica’s continuing quest for hegemony was the surest way to destroy the values that made America great’.
default (Quotes from his book ‘Does America 
defaultneed a
default Foreign Policy
default’
default, 2001).
defaultHas America changeddefault?defaultHas the tone changed under the first 
defaultand second
default Obama administrations? Not really. Or not at least for Obama’s Secretary of 
defaultState Hillary
default Clinton during her term. In the New Statesman of July 2012 she is still arguing 
defaultthat the
default new international order ‘depends on American economic, military and diplomatic leadership’, although acknowledging that ‘new regional and global centres of influence are quickly emerging’.
defaultPresident Obama’s recent and obvious reluctance to go for early military intervention and missile assault against Syria, following the use of chemical weapons almost certainly by pro-Assad forces, may be the signs of a deeper shift in 
defaultthe American
default 
defaultmood. 
defaultThe 
defaultclear lessons
default of this saga have 
defaultbeen that
default a) neither America nor the West as a whole are wise in future to act without the full cooperation of the new rising powers and alliances of the world outside the West, and b) that diplomacy and soft power have to be given an increasing priority over military action, even if the threat of ‘hard power’ is in the background as the last resort.
defaultBut the American position was reached by an almost comically 
defaultzig-zag
default route, by a chance remark from the US Secretary of State, Mr.
default 
defaultKerry, and from the President’s sudden thought that he might copy the path of  London thinking by  consulting the legislature – and perhaps, as with the British leaders, thereby be saved from his dilemma by the Parliamentary bell.
defaultThe confusion has long since spread to American policy and attitudes towards the European Union. State Department officials have continued their prolonged campaign urging Britain to integrate into today’s  European Union, apparently blissfully unaware of the changing nature of the whole European process under the impact of new world conditions and new network pressures. Even President Obama has joined in this grievously ill-informed process. 
defaultThe so-called ‘Pivot’ to the East.defaultWhat is one to make of assertions and reports that America is ‘turning east’ or ‘pivoting’, in its foreign policy preoccupations? Probably not very much. That language, too, seems to reflect a slim grasp of the new realities of a networked world. With or without dependence on Middle East oil and gas America is as wired up to Middle East events and instabilities as much as to Asian developments. In a network 
defaultworld there
default is no choice to be had 
defaultbetween one
default region and another. Vulnerabilities exist to shocks and distortions in both. The dangers to America’s physical security arising from Middle East tensions, from 
defaultjihadism
default or from the spill-over from the Islamic civil war being fought out in Syria with such savagery, are just as great as before. Entanglement with the fate of Israel remains undiminished, and may have 
defaultbecome even
default more fraught 
defaultfollowing the
default first moves in the negotiations with Iran over uranium enrichment and nuclear power development – bitterly criticised by the Israeli leadership.
defaultMeanwhile,
default despite the prospect of American self-sufficiency in both oil and gas, and a cessation of oil imports from the Middle 
defaultEast altogether
default, American interests in a stable world oil market remain strong wherever the oil is produced and in whichever consumer direction it goes.
defaultLarge displays of naval and military strength may have anyway ceased to be the way to win hearts and minds and persuade or influence – in fact they may achieve the opposite. For example, in the Far East, the US desire to ‘engage’ with China may not necessarily be helped by the US determination to keep its Pacific 
defaultFleet patrolling
default near to Chinese territorial waters and in the East China 
defaultSeas. 
defaultSome contend  that it is this ‘hard power’ manifestation , and the constant 
defaultsense of antagonism and affront which it generates, which lie behind China’s current territorial spat with Japan.  
default  Here, as elsewhere, Britain , both with its own deep experience in the Middle East region, and with its increasingly close friendship with, and interest  in, the still  giant Japanese economy,  may want to stay much clearer of US  strategy than it chose to do in  the case of the Iraq invasion. This would certainly be more in tune with the promotion of Britain’s 
defaultown interests and
default with its re-positioning in a less West-dominated world.  
defaultThere 
defaultare,
default as often, two Americas with which to deal. On the one hand the old vitality and innovative brilliance remains, or returns, with low-cost power lifting the American economy out of the doldrums steadily and strongly. This is a trend which does not fit into the simplistic picture of Asia booming while the West declines. On the other hand there is an America full of self-doubt, dismayed by the bottomless complexity of Middle East politics, disillusioned with the results of heavy military intervention in Iraq and Afghanistan, and uncertain of its new role or how to handle Far East tensions.
defaultThe best British approachdefault defaultnow.defaultFor Britain the William Hague 
defaultadage of
default a trans-Atlantic relationship which is ‘solid but not slavish’ is the right one to follow. Britain has everything to lose by being perceived either as Washington’s poodle and slavish emulator, or as just one piece in a broader European Union foreign policy over which it has only marginal influence. 
default In nation after nation, and across continents, the British strength lies in its uniquely 
defaultstrong soft
default power 
defaultlinkages,
default of which, incidentally
default, the
default Commonwealth network is one of the finest transmission mechanisms. Neither of the old perceptions – that British had only the narrow choice of destiny between Europe and America (or of some supposed bridge between the two)  -  allows the now growing  value of British influence and culture , drawing from  deep wells of goodwill towards all things British right round the world, to be developed. Neither perception allows for the 
defaultincreasingly favourable
default positioning of Britain in the new global network and in the new Commonwealth network within that 
defaultlarger one
default.
defaultA re-positioned and re-invigorated Britain can 
defaultand must
default understand that things are now different. A leading British newspaper editor recently reiterated his 
defaultview that ‘the US is still the most powerful nation on earth’. It is not. The digital web, linking billons of messages, contacts and opinions across the planet every minute, is now the most powerful ‘nation’ on earth .We are all the players within it and  new skills will be needed to operate in radically changed world conditions.  
default (NB. A fuller version of this analysis and  these arguments may be found in Lord Howell’s latest book – 
defaultOld Links and New Tiesdefault; Power and Persuasion in an Age Of Networks, published by 
defaultI.B.Tauris
default,
default 
defaultNovember 2013)                                              
default12 December 2013
default&#xa0;
default