Written evidence submitted by the Disability Law Service (JRR 0039)default&#xa0;
defaultThis is a response to the 
defaultcall for evidence from the Joint Committee on Human Rights 
defaultregarding the Government
default’
defaults proposed judicial review reforms.
default  
defaultThe Disability Law Service 
defaultdisagrees
default with
default the proposed reforms as they fail to 
defaulttake i
defaultnto account 
defaultof the way
default community care law works in
default practice. We believe that the
default reforms could pot
defaultentially d
defaultevastate an important
default area of law 
defaultwhich currently safeguards the 
defaultrights
default to care for
default the most vulnerable in society
default,
default namely those with the most severe 
defaultof disabilities and the elderly.
defaultWe were
default un
defaultable to identify
default any adequate attempt to 
defaultconsider the potential
default effects 
defaultof these proposals 
defaulton those with disabilities
default. We could not find any consideration of the joint impact of these changes
default 
defaultcoupled with the impact of the
default other legal aid proposal
defaults
default upon those with disabilities
default. 
defaultFurthermore, w
defaulte 
defaultare 
defaultalso oppose
defaultd to
default the lowering of the 
defaultlegal status of the 
defaultPublic Sector Equality Duty
default.
default 
defaultThe lowering in legal status would remove the current protections that exist for those with disabilities
default and without the 
defaultability to challenge decisions via the court there will be no way
default for the Public Sector Equali
defaultty Duty to be legally enforced.
defaultDLS defaultBackgrounddefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWe provide this account on behalf of the many c
defaultlients who have sought our services.  The Disability Law Service has been running cases in the area of community care for over 20 years. This has included a number of high profile cases such as the case of  
defaultElaine McDonald defaultvsdefault the Royal Borough of Kensingtodefaultn &amp; Chelsea default[2011] UKSC 33 
defaultOn appeal from: [2010] EWCA 
defaultCiv
default 1109
default, 
defaultR v Islington ex parte defaultRixondefault (1997-8) 1 CCLR 119, 
defaultR (defaultGarnhamdefault) v Secretary of State for Healthdefault [2009] EWHC  574 (Admin) and others.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultDLS Response Regarding Costs for Judicial Reviewdefault&#xa0;
defaultWe object to the proposal
default not
default to pay the costs of a case where permission has not been granted. W
defaulte are of the opinion 
defaultthat this proposal fails to consider
default the effect that this can have on specific areas o
defaultf law suc
defaulth as community c
defaultare. 
defaultIn this case we expect the following may take place
default: 
default&#xa0;
defaultNo evidence has been provided
default to suggest
default that 
defaultthe system has been misused 
defaultwith
default 
defaultan abundance of
default unmerito
defaultrio
defaultus cases within the area of community c
defaultare.
default Neither have we been provided with any evidence to show a substantial increase in the number of cases within the area of Community Care in general
default. 
default We also submit that it is the legal aid agencies job to filter 
defaultcases that are without merit
default which is substantially safer than effectively removing the right of redress by putting in place in impossibly high test for Judicial Review.
default&#xa0;
defaultDisability and Community Care Law
defaultCommunity Care is a specialised niche area of law w
defaulthich on many occasions can require oral permission hearings just so that the judge can understand the area and the surrounding legislation. It is an area w
defaulth
defaultere many of those affected by the decisions of local authorities do not get access to advocacy
default or re
defaultpresentation
default and so never receive adequate care. The ombudsman has no power to enforce any action and even to get a determination would usually require a lawyer just to make sense of a situation. We find time after time that local authorities are enacting 
defaultpolicies across the board which are unlawful and there is no way to challenge and force a change except via judicial review. 
defaultAs noted above, we provide free telephone advice given by solicitors to the members of the public with community care problems. 
defaultDue to the nature of the area of law, almost every issue concerns a person with a disability. We have found that the number of telephone calls have been increasing as Local Authorities have had their budgets reduced. This has led to those with disabilities
default having their care reduced unlawfully and any changes can only increase this size of the problem. There has been no conside
defaultration of the effects of such 
defaultproposed changes on those with disabilities. We would request that if there is any doubt as to the natu
defaultre of the effects on those with disabilities or the levels of problems that they are facing then we would invite anyone from the committee or from the Ministry of Justice to come and listen to our advice lines. 
defaultThis is an open invitation.default&#xa0;
defaultDoes the grantin
defaultg of permission in Judicial Review cases 
defaultequate to success in a Judicial Review case?
defaultThe experience of the solicitors acting at the Disability Law Service over the past 5 years is that the granting of permission does not in 
defaultanyway
default indicate 
defaultwhether a case 
defaulthas had merit or has been successful. 
defaultThis is a fundamental flaw which is evident in the proposed amendments. 
defaultAs the following case examples will show, permission rather pertains to whether there is currently still a live matter which has meritorious grou
defaultnds for challenge. In
default the
default first
default 
defaultcase
default example
default we m
defaultention
default below, the judge specifically 
defaultreferred
default to the proposed rules and stated that this is a case which would be affected in the future
default should the Government’s 
defaultproposed
default reforms of Judicial Review come into 
defaultforce
default. He said this 
defaultbecause he was
default 
defaultissuing a positive order, yet 
defaultwas not able to grant permission as the local authority had made a last minute concession which meant they were no longer breaking the law
default and instead there was a new decision which could be 
defaultchallenged
default. 
defaultThe concessions which the local authorities make are
default concession
defaults
default which they were not willing to make until an application h
defaultad been made to the high court or they believe that issuing
default of an application for permission to 
defaultproceed
default to Judicial Revie
defaultw
default is imminent. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFailure to provide funding
defaultThere is no option to ensure local authorities fulfil their duty to provide care in urgent cases, unless by way of an order issued by the High Court, or alternatively when threatened with a potential Order. 
defaultIn o
defaultur experience there has been an increasing request for assistance in the area of community care, as local authority funding has been cut. In the past seven days we have received sixty requests for assistance regarding community care issues with local autho
defaultrities. Earlier this year we discovered one local authority in particular remove twenty four hour care packages from numerous individuals who then sought advice via our service. Fortunately, we succeeded in stopping this 
defaultby sending the local authority in q
defaultuestion pre-action protocol letters informing
default of the threat of Judicial Review. Removal of the twenty four hour care package would have seen the local authority save thousands of pounds. There remain countless others that encounter such problems of whom ha
defaultve not sought legal advice. 
defaultFailure to provide funding when
default permission
default has not been granted will
default 
defaultsubsequently
default lead to 
defaultan
default inability to challenge the actions
default of local authorities which infringe 
defaultupon the most basic
default rights
default of the elderly and those of disabilities
default. 
defaultImplementing the proposal 
defaultwill 
defaultexacerbate 
defaultthe 
defaulteffects 
defaultof what is already a torturous situation 
defaultgiven that 
defaultlocal authorities 
defaultare cutting funding 
defaultfor care packages left, right and centre
default. It will enable them to cont
defaultinue violating 
defaultthe most basic 
defaulthuman rights without repercussion.
default 
defaultAs
default 
defaultsolicitor
defaults
default practising
default community care l
defaultaw
default,
default 
defaultwe
default 
defaultdo not often have to issue a claim in the high court but conversely we
default 
defaultusually have 
defaultto 
defaultthreaten Judicial Review in 
defaultalmost every one
default of
default our
default cas
defaultes
default. 
defaultWe have found that 
defaultL
defaultocal authorities
default appear to be breaking the law across the board in adult social welfare and
default 
defaultonly 
defaultappear to wish to 
defaultrectify wrong doing
default if they
default are of the belief
default that
default 
defaulta
defaultction
default will be taken against them
default. 
defaultLocal authorities have a tenden
defaultcy to wait until the
default deadline
default date before taking action, knowing that court proceedings will follow. 
defaultSome local authorities will make you issue in the high court and others will wait till the deadline on a letter before claim if they believe you are really
default intent on issuing the case in the high court. 
default&#xa0;
defaultCurrent barriers to funding in Judicial Review cases in community care
defaultThe proposed changes do not consider the fact that there are already existing obstacles to overcome when attempting to make an applicati
defaulton for Judicial Review. Local Authorities
default are aware that
default cases
default cannot be issued
default in the high court unless we 
defaulthave a meritorious case
default which has usually had a positive advice drafted
default by a barrister where the
default prospect of 
defaultsuccess will invariably 
defaultneed to
default exceed the
default 50%
default mark
default.
default 
defaultWe have known of defendants attempting to contact the Legal Aid Agency just to attempt to have the certificate of public funding removed so that a challenge cannot be brought. 
defaultThis is important as there is no other way to make a loca
defaultl authority take action. 
default 
defaultHowever,
default this would no
defaultt be such if they thought a case was unlikely to receive funding and subsequently
default 
defaultdoubtful it would reach the High Court.
default 
defaultE
defaultven 
defaultif a case has a 100% prospect of success this
default does not mean 
defaultpermission will be gr
defaultanted.
default&#xa0;
defaultCase examples
default - 
defaultThe case of Mr
default A
defaultThis year we were forced to issue a case in the High Court because a local authority had failed to provide adequate care to an individual suffering from Muscular Dystrophy. This person had been left with no choice b
defaultut to live on a sofa for five years without any care being offered by the authority in question. The clients’ father, aged 80 had to meet his   son’s care needs, whilst also providing care for his wife, aged 79 whom suffered from Alzheimer’s disease. Moreo
defaultver, the local authority had been obstructing the Claimant’s access to a Disabled Facilities Grant to enable him required adaptations to extend his parent’s house for the purpose of building an additional bedroom.
defaultWe attempted negotiations for eight months
default and sent numerous letters before action. We applied for judicial review but the local authority had made some concessions the day before a permission hearing. We had a full day
default oral
default permission hearing but we were not granted permission but instead given a
default second permission hearing despite the first hearing resulting in a positive order for our client. The local authority failed to comply with the order and for the second time the
default oral permission
default hearing lasted a whole day. The hearing again resulted in a p
defaultositive order. However, we were not granted permission due to last minute concessions finally made on the authority’s part following the second order. We were instead given a third permission hearing. Currently, a Disabled Facilities Grant has been agreed 
defaultand a care package offered, yet we were never granted permission by the High Court. This is a common occurrence and the reason why the statistics in community care cases do not provide an accurate picture.  
defaultThis case would be classified as not having permi
defaultssion.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe case of Mr B
defaultIn this matter the local authority were about to remove a person with severe autism from his care home as they thought it was
default too
default expensive. They had not found an adequate place to meet his needs and had not even carried out a ne
defaultw needs assessment, care plan or risk assessment of what the effect could be. We were instructed two weeks before the proposed move which his parents had been protesting against. With the threat of judicial review placed upon the local authority the local 
defaultauthority have decided to take no action and stated in correspondence that this was only because of the threat of judicial review. 
default We have had to keep this case open as the local authority appear to be waiting until we go away so they can remove him. 
default&#xa0;
defaultTh
defaulte case of Mr C
defaultThis client was threatened with being evicted from his care home despite serious safeguarding issues. He was given 7 days notice and told that he should report to the local authority homeless section stating he was homeless. There was no nee
defaultds assessment 
defaultor care provision put in place. His father contacted us and we contacted the local authority
default. The local authority back
defaulted
default down immediately with the threat of judicial review. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe case of Miss D
defaultThe client was not receiving an amount of care to meet her needs, the local authority would not state how the needs were met or increase the care package. She has Multiple 
defaultSclerosis
default and required a high degree of care. We threatened judicial review which ha
defaultd no effect so we issued a claim in the high court and they back down immediately agreeing 
defaultto provide
default reasons and to reassess her care package. She was then given an increased care package. 
defaultThis case would be classified as not having permission. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultcase
default of Mr E
defaultThis case involved a mother whom looked after her severely disabled son whom had a multitude of disabilities. 
defaultIn this matter the loca
defaultl authority would not provide a 
defaultcarers assessment, we sent numerous letters before claim and had meetings. We fina
defaultlly issued in the high court and they gave in within one hour of receiving notification from us of having issued the case. In this matter they contacted the LAA and tried to have the certificate taken away. 
defaultThis case would be classified as not having permi
defaultssion.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe case of Miss F
defaultThis case involved a mother with a severe disability who required a Disabled Facilities Grant but the local aut
defaulthority would not allow her to apply. They stated they were not allowed to under the law. We instructed a barrister, po
defaultinted out that they had discretion and that there was guidance within the guidance and again threatened Judicial Review. And again they back down 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe case of Miss G
defaultIn this matter a 
defaultperson with so severe care needs that they required 24 hour care was giv
defaulten an assessment and then reduced to only a few hours a week. Again we threatened Judicial Review and they put the 24 hour care back in place. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe complaints procedure
defaultIt has been often argued that those with disabilities can use the complaints procedure
default. We can state that from our experience and our clients experience that the complaints procedure is not fit for purpose. The local authorities have a vested interest in stating that there has been no wrongdoing on their part. 
defaultOften issues can be matter of 
defaultlife or death 
default(i.e. someone’s 24 care package being reduced to 4 one hour visits per day).
default&#xa0;
default Therefore 
defaulta 
defaultcomplaint is clearly not a viable option,
defaultIncreasingly we are hearing reports from callers to our advice line that their complaints are not being dealt with, or are being dismissed out of hand with little or no fair and transparent consideration of the facts by the local authority.
default&#xa0;
default This is sympto
defaultmatic of a complaints procedure being controlled by the organisation being complained about.
default&#xa0;
default This used to be the case with complaints against the police until it was acknowledged that you need a degree of independence when dealing with issues.
default&#xa0;
default At a time 
defaultwhen local authorities are having their budgets put under increasing pressure, and are having to make financially sensitive decisions, it is vital that an independent body is responsible for dealing with complaints.
default&#xa0;
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusion
defaultWe have many of these 
defaultexamples and our advice lines show the same material and why there is a need for the Judicial Review or a tribunal with the same powers including the ability to make an urgent and immediate decision which is legally enforceable.
defaultWe kindly
default request that the 
defaultgovernment reconsider
defaults
default this matter in light of the way perm
defaultission statistics are used, as they do not provide a portrayal as to 
defaultwhe
defaultther a community care case 
default 
defaulthas been successful
default.
default And again we extend the invitation to listen to our advice lines if there is
default any question as to the veracity of the situation within community care or the need for Judicial Review in its current format. 
default&#xa0;
default27
default November 2013 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default