&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultUnrevised transcript of evidence taken before
defaultThe Select Committee on defaultthe European UniondefaultInternal Market, Infrastructure and Employment (Sub-Committee B)
defaultInquiry on
default&#xa0;
defaultEU Action to Tackle Youth Unemploymentdefault&#xa0;defaultEvidence Session No.
default 
default4
default 
default              
default              
defaultHeard in 
defaultPublic 
default              
default Questions 
default48
default - 
default60
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultMonday 18
default November 2013
default4.
default15
default pm
defaultWitnesses:
default Michael Larbalestier, Jenny Cryer, 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wyness 
defaultand Linda Dean
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultUSE OF THE TRANSCRIPT
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultMembers present
defaultLord Wilson of Tillyorn
default (
defaultActing 
defaultChairman)
defaultLord Brooke of Alverthorpe
defaultLord Clinton-Davis
defaultLord Cotter
defaultLord Fearn
defaultLord Haskel
defaultBaroness Hooper
defaultLord Kakkar
defaultEarl of 
defaultLiverpool
defaultBaroness O’Cathain 
default(Chairman)
defaultBaroness Valentine
default________________
defaultExamination of WitnessesdefaultMichael Larbalestierdefault, 
defaultHead of Research and Knowledge Management, Prospects
default, 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault, 
defaultRegional Operations Director West Yorkshire, Prospects, 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault, 
defaultDirector 
defaultof Policy and Strategy
default, 
defaultthe Prince’s Trust, and 
defaultLinda defaultDeandefault,
default 
defaultManaging Director, Rathbone
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultQ48 default&#xa0; 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default 
defaultWelcome. Thank you all very much indeed for coming. Just to start off with a number of formalities, does any 
defaultM
defaultember of the Committee have an interest to declare which they have not declared before?
defaultBaroness Valentine:default I think that I am jointly running Skills London with Prospects services. Are you the same thing as Ray Auvray? Yes, in that case, I am.
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Thank you. This session is on the record, which means that it is being broadcast live and will be accessible subsequently on the parliamentary website. You will all, as witnesses, receive a transcript to check 
defaultthat 
defaultit is correct.
default W
defaulthen that has been checked, it will be put on the public record in printed form and on the parliamentary website. Now for some formalities. One among you, Adrian Thacker, is not yet with us. I hope that he will join us in a moment; he must have got stuck on the tube or something. It would be helpful if you could just all introduce yourselves, and then I will ask each of you in turn to make an opening statement if you have something that you would like to say. 
defaultLinda Deandefault: I am Linda Dean, the managing director for Rathbone 
defaultUK
default. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: I am Jenny Cryer, the regional operations director for Prospects. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: I am Michael Larbalestier, the head of research for Prospects. 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Fine. Thank you all very much indeed. It is perhaps worth saying that, if there are four of you there, if there is a particular question that you do not feel that you want to answer, or which is not relevant to what you want to say, please do not think that 
defaultyou 
defaulthave to answer it. There are a lot of you and a lot of questions, and 55 minutes. Do not answer if you do not feel that you do not have something relevant to say. Perhaps it would be nice if you could each start with a statement of things that you want to say. Could I start with you, Linda Dean?
defaultLinda Deandefault: Of course, yes. Just to put it in context, in Rathbone we worked with 13,000 young people last year across 
defaultEngland
default, 
defaultNorthern Ireland
default, 
defaultScotland
default and 
defaultWales
default. Our main purpose is to support young people who, because of social or economic disadvantage, have not been able to access employment or skills. Our key purpose is also to act as an advocate for young people. In particular today, I want to focus on the needs of young people who are most disadvantaged. I also appreciate the opportunity to share with you evidence that has been directly informed by our young people. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: Prospects works with young people and adults across the country. Our mission is around inspiring individuals and organisations to success. The range of contracts 
defaultthat 
defaultI manage in 
defaultWest Yorkshire
default focus 
defaultin particular 
defaulton unemployed young people. Some contracts are delivered for local authorities, but there are also a number of streams 
defaultthat are 
defaultfunded through ESF. We have a particular interest in very vulnerable young people and 
defaultin 
defaulthow, in an area where we have high youth unemployment, we support young people to access the job market as opposed to participating in education and training. We are keen to make sure that some of the experience that we have had is shared. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: As I am also from Prospects, just to add to what Jenny has said, we are an employment, education and training services-focused organisation. I guess we work with around 1 million people a year in a variety of programmes and projects that we deliver
default, which are 
defaultprimarily careers services and employability programmes, such as the work programme, the National Careers Service and the youth contract. Some of the things that we are perhaps particularly interested to raise with you today are the rise of precarious employment and the implications of that for young people in the labour market
default, 
defaultand changes to the provision of careers guidance and 
defaultthe reduction in access to face 
defaultto
default 
defaultface careers guidan
defaultce for young people in schools.
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Thank you very much. Are you from the Prince’s Trust?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I am from the Prince’s Trust. 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default But you are not Adrian Thacker, are you?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I am not even Adrienne Thacker. Apologies, everyone. I am Rosemary Watt-Wyness. I am director of policy and strategy at the Prince’s Trust. The Prince’s Trust works with young people between the ages of 13 and 30, all of whom are either unemployed or, if they are still of compulsory education age, are identified as being young people who are at risk of leaving without the kind of qualifications they will need successfully 
defaultto 
defaultfind work. We work with over 55,000 young people a year in the 
defaultUK
default and run a range of programmes 
defaultthat 
defaultare targeted at helping them into employment or ba
defaultck into education and training.
defaultQ49 default&#xa0; 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Thank you very much indeed, and thanks to all of you who sent 
defaultin 
defaultnotes in advance. I 
defaultwill 
defaultstart off with the questions
default. T
defaulthere seems to be a general consensus that youth employment across 
defaultEurope
default is a particularly serious aspect of the economic crisis that we are facing at the moment. Could you briefly summarise for us your view of exactly what the problem is now, and how it differs from crises in earlier recessions—or, indeed, from situations when we have been relatively prosperous
default?
default Perhaps Linda Dean could start. 
defaultLinda Deandefault: In our view it is particularly problematic in the current economic crisis due to the number of young people who are long-term unemployed compared to the number of people who are unemployed. There is a worsening trend, which is currently at an average of 50% throughout the EU, of young people who have been out of the labour market for more than 12 months. That then becomes an entrenched position for those young people. Secondly, we believe that in this economic crisis, compared to others, there has been a disproportionate impact on young people. In previous recessions, the impact of unemployment has been more evenly distributed, whereas in this one it is at the highest for young people in that 16
default to 
default24 age group. 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I completely agree with the point that the number of young people who are unemployed for more than two years is a particular concern. We are also concerned about the level of youth employment. In some respects, you would expect that youth unemployment figures might start to come down a bit, partly because over the next few years there are going to be fewer young people around full stop. Because of the introduction of the raising of participation age, some of the 16 and 17 year-olds who would previously have been included in the figure will start not to be. But we are not seeing that yet. What we are seeing is youth employment at record lows. It is not only a concern that we have high youth unemployment but that some young people might be coming out of the unemployment figures while we are not seeing a growth in youth employment. I think we can therefore say that that is a figure that we really need to keep an eye on. One of the things that we feel is different from previous recessions is that there were problems around youth employment prior to the recession. The recession has exacerbated and highlighted it, but what we are seeing at the moment is partly a result of changes in the labour market, particularly with some of the lower-skilled jobs not being there any
default 
defaultmore. Some of the entry-level jobs that young people would have gone into previously, as a first step in employment, do not exist in the same way any more, partly as a result of technological changes and globalisation. So actually getting a foot on the ladder is more difficult now than it used to be. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: Participation at 16
default to 
default18 is good. Certainly in the areas in which I am managing contracts, more young people are participating. What they are not doing is then going into the job market. It certainly appears to us that they are being bumped, I guess, in a number of ways. One is by older workers. The other is be
defaultcause some of the jobs are part-
defaulttime, and that is not a pattern of work that young people have traditionally done. We are also seeing large numbers of graduates coming out who may not be able to find what would traditionally be graduate-level work, and who are therefore taking jobs 
defaultthat 
defaultpreviously might have gone to school-leavers and those who have not been to university. There seem to be a number of factors 
defaultthat 
defaultare displacing young people out of the job market, hidden underneath the
default 
defaultunemployment figures. I guess we would also say that there is a factor around access to impartial advice and guidance for young people as well, and being able to access independent help to get into the job market. Schools are very good at guiding young people into university and learning options but are sometimes much less aware, particularly in a significantly changing job market, of what is out there for young people. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: I would agree with my colleagues here in their response so far. In particular, young people face a double challenge in the labour market. When many find employment, it is in jobs
default that
default could be described as precarious, perhaps with zero-hours contracts
default, and they may be part-
defaulttime, as Jenny has mentioned, and lacking the career-progression opportunities that positions which young people might have entered in the past might have offered them. 
defaultE
defaultmployers are still saying that young people coming into the labour market are not prepared for the world of work. This message is repeated regularly. In particular, there are concerns around literacy and numeracy skills among young people. 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Does anyone have any particular points to raise on that?
defaultQ50 default&#xa0; 
defaultBaroness Valentine:default Just a very quick question on how you define youth employment, which was the point that you touched on the end: the Prêt à Manger problem where no young Brit allegedly gets in and there might be foreign graduates in the jobs. Do those count as youth employment jobs?
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: Yes. They count as being employed.
defaultBaroness Valentine:default The leisure sector in 
defaultLondon
default, which is the bit I know, is growing and will have a lot of low-skill entry jobs, but I was not clear whether those count as youth employment jobs.
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I believe they do.
defaultLord Clinton-Davis:default Do you focus on any particular clubs in universities? When I was at university a long time ago, certain clubs were particularly active in various issues. Do you notice that any of them focus upon issues that concern you? In that respect, do you think that they could be of value to what you are trying to do?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I think that most of the young people the Prince’s Trust is working with are at a very early-stage skill level, so when we work with the higher education institutes we work more with people from university who might be putting themselves forward as volunteers to support some of the young people who we are working with. We also try to encourage some of the higher education institutes to get engaged in fundraising activities, again to support the kind of work that we are doing. So we do have some relationship, but we are working directly with our young people at a much earlier stage in the education qualification ladder. 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default I have a list of people who want to ask supplementaries
default: 
defaultLord Haskel, Lord Cotter, Lord Fearn, Lord Kakkar and Lord Brooke
default. S
defaulto 
defaultp
defaultlease put in some quick supplementaries.
defaultQ51 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Haskel:default You spoke about fewer low-skilled jobs being available, but if you go to any restaurant, hospital or hotel, the low-skilled jobs are filled mainly by people from overseas. Is that why the low-skilled jobs are not available?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I think that actually there are just fewer low-skilled jobs in the economy than there were. One of the things that we are quite often asked about is whether the young people we are working with actually want to work or whether they are in some way workshy of doing some of the entry-level, basic jobs that might be available. I do not think that is the case. I think there is a lot of confusion out there and that young people often do not know how to access them. We are running programmes at the moment with Health Education England and the NHS in which we work with young people and the NHS as an employer, and young people are then going into catering in our hospitals and into waste management. I have rarely seen any young person so passionate about their work experience placement as the young man who told me all about waste management in a major hospital. I think this is about us helping to link them up with those opportunities. 
defaultLinda Deandefault: Can I just confirm Rosemary’s response? It is really important to understand, as Rosemary said, that the majority of young people who we work with and speak to have really sensible aspirations: they would like employment, they would like a home, and at some point they would like a family. When some of the entry-level positions are part-time, the cost of travel to them for a few hours or potentially a zero-hours contract becomes a barrier, so it is not the work itself but the means to get to the work that is the problem, particularly when a lot of young people are estranged from families and have no other financial support. We believe that the willingness is there.
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: There is an issue about how much we can support those people so that they can compete effectively in an interview. We are back to the issue of how prepared they are to be in that situation. Undoubtedly, there are situations where they are displaced by older workers.
defaultLord Cotter:default This is particularly problematical now. Two representatives from Prospects mention careers advice and guidance face to face, and a number of us have this concern. You are saying that we in Parliament should be able to do something about it. Are you being listened to on the lack of careers advice and guidance, and do you think that anything can be done to address it?
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: There is clearly a growing shared concern about it. We are not necessarily seeing some of the structural change that will make that happen, because while it is the responsibility of schools, there is the intrinsic issue of impartiality and skills to be able to do it.
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default I see nods from others. Let us move on to the next supplementary.
defaultLord Fearn:default I have a question 
defaultfor
default Rathbone, actually. Is there such a thing as c
defaultareer progression in Rathbone and
default,
default if so
default,
default where is it?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: For our young people? 
defaultLinda Deandefault: In the programmes that we work with, we engage with young people at a street or community level. Then we support them to move on to skills
default and 
defaultfurther qualifications development, and then we aim to help them move on to employment and apprenticeships levels 2 and 3. We have an aspiration that we can take many of our young people from a street engagement setting to an HE environment. Some of our young people are academically able to do that but their circumstances have meant that they have not been able to engage. Others of our young people may be practically very able although academically they are not strong. Everything that we do is about progressing young people. At the moment, between seven 
defaultand 
defaulteight out of 10 of the young people we work with achieve success and move on. 
defaultQ52 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Kakkar:default Jenny Cryer, you mentioned that beneath the surface of this headline focus on youth unemployment a number of other factors are contributing to it. Do you think that the development of European youth policy in this area to address youth unemployment recognises the underlying factors that are contributing to it and in effect provides schemes to deal with them?
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: A number of strands of European funding have targeted different elements of the issue for graduates, people with no qualifications and others, so there is definitely an attempt to address the underlying issues. Certainly speaking from a regional perspective, the European money that comes into 
defaultWest Yorkshire
default has made a significant contribution to tackling some of the issues of youth unemployment. That does not mean that there are not still some issues within that, but it certainly appears that funding streams are attempting to address the different elements.
defaultLord Brooke of Alverthorpe:default I will ask a quick question. Linda Dean started by referring to 16 to 24 year-olds. Are you all talking about 16 to 24 year-olds? I just had an exchange with a Minister in the Chamber on youth unemployment who was talking about 18 to 24 year-olds.
defaultLinda Deandefault: The majority of Rathbone’s work is with 16 to 24 year-olds, so I am reflecting back against the experience from that age group.
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Shall we move on to the second question? Lord Clinton-Davis.
defaultQ53 default&#xa0; 
defaultLord Clinton-Davis:default Do you think that we are doing enough here in the 
defaultUnited Kingdom
default to address the issue of youth unemployment? Do you think that we focus sufficiently on the real problems? How could the situation be improved?
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: One of the areas for potential improvement is actually much earlier than the 16 to 24 age group that we have been talking about. We should consider the careers and education guidance and the employability skills development that can begin in secondary school or even earlier. Certainly we would like to see more work in schools developing that knowledge and understanding of the world of work and the soft skills that are needed in the labour market. We would also say that sometimes the initiatives and some of the interventions that have been delivered have perhaps been too tightly targeted on very specific groups and that there could be an argument that greater flexibility would be more effective and would improve some of the interventions, such as eligibility criteria in order to join an initiative that are based on for example one’s level of qualification, so that anyone who has more than one GCSE or a different level of qualification to that specified in the initiative would be unable to participate.
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: There are lots of very good initiatives working with people who are unemployed, and there is an opportunity for those to be co-ordinated better. Sometimes a number of things happen in silos that could be better brought together and would make a little more sense. In the local enterprise partnerships at 
defaultLeeds
default city regional level there is a real attempt to draw those together, because otherwise you are in danger of having things that occasionally overlap. The other issue is the short-term nature of some of those things, such as the length of engagement a young person can have through some of the European programmes, which can be quite limited, and the length of the actual programme. Sometimes just as the programme becomes embedded and is producing good results, we stop, we recommission, we tender again, and we come up with a different model. Sometimes that can be a barrier to what in essence is a very good effort to tackle the issue.
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I agree, but there is a recognition that it is a big issue. We just need to be sure that if the headline numbers start coming down a bit we do not lose that focus. 
defaultY
defaultoung people tell us that they want more training programmes and they want them to be more accessible. We did a survey of our young people recently, and a lot of them were saying that they did not have the money to be able to afford the training and the skills development that they wanted to do. I do not honestly know exactly what is contributing to that picture, but it is certainly a concern and we are going to look at it more closely. 
defaultMore
default could be done to support people on enterprise. Young people being able to start up their own employment could be a contributory factor. The other thing that is useful to think about is that under the benefits system we have a delay before unemployed young people can start training. I wonder whether, instead of saying, “Well you can now have training because you gave been unemployed for a certain duration”, we could not look at their profile of need and then say, “Your profile of need indicates that you will be unemployed for a considerable time, so let’s not wait for six months before we start your training, by which time your CV has got worse and you are probably more miserable and depressed and it would all be more challenging”. 
defaultLinda Deandefault: Obviously, I agree with my colleagues on this. We have a large range of employability and skills programmes in the 
defaultUK
default. We need to make sure that they do not operate in silos, because young people need both employability and skills to secure and sustain employment. However, we need to do more to focus on those young people who are the long-term unemployed and have specific needs., As Michael, said, that is then not based on tight eligibility criteria but rather on the needs of those young people. They are often the most vulnerable and have the least access to support networks to enable them to engage with the broad range of skills and employability programmes. There needs to be greater recognition, which we have touched on, that young people sometimes need financial support to access the provision. They are not unwilling to undertake skills training, but they are often unable
default because of 
defaultbasics such as a travel pass for a week, to enable them to get from A to B. There are also a number of reasons why young people are long-term unemployed, and it is a question of bringing together the housing, health, education and employability agendas, and undertaking some more practical action in those areas. 
defaultLord Clinton-Davis:default What I am particularly concerned about, apart from your contribution, is that there is very little hard evidence about particular groups of young people who are adversely affected by the present situation. Would you like to give rather more evidence about that?
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: Certainly, when we look at youth unemployment in the areas in which I manage, 
defaultwe see that 
defaultyoung people who have been YOT supervised or have had contact with youth offending services are the most likely to be unemployed
default: 
defaultthat is 50% or more of the group that we are looking at. For young people leaving care, we have made significant inroads in their participation at 16 and 17. Again, however, once we get to 18 and 19, that group of young people is disproportionately over
default-
defaultrepresented in the unemployment statistics. We have good participation in our areas from young people with learning difficulties until they are 19. There are some groups of young people in those categories for whom, clearly, accessing jobs is a major issue. 
defaultThose 
defaultdata back that up quite strongly. 
defaultQ54 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Kakkar:default We heard, if I have understood correctly, an anxiety about short-termism, in that the major focus on youth unemployment at the moment may evaporate as things start to ch
defaultange. Do you have evidence that
default in the past 10 or 15 years, European schemes have consistently targeted youth unemployment in a sustainable way as they approached the crisis that we now face?
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Who wants to pick that one up? Rosemary Watt-Wyness, you look as though you want to. 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: No, I was just thinking it through. I feel 
defaultas though 
defaultmy answer would be pretty anecdotal about the past 10 to 15 years of European schemes. My feeling is that European employment 
defaulthas 
defaultprobably been a focus of ESF for quite some time, and there is obviously a lot more going on at the moment with the youth guarantee. The EU is putting in place a re-employment initiative.
defaultLord Kakkar:default But as a long-term strategy, because it is clearly a long-term problem. Have there been schemes before this particular crisis 
defaultthat 
defaulthave demonstrated a sustainable commitment?
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: I think the answer I gave about the short-termism of the programmes 
defaultpartly 
defaultaddresses that. There has been a long history of engagement
default,
default but it would be very difficult to call that sustained because it is retendered and changes every two or three years. Even gathering the evidence of that becomes very difficult. Yes, the programmes are there, but not necessarily in 
defaulta sustained and similar manner.
defaultBaroness O'Cathain:default Yes, I have suddenly had a flash of thinking about whether we are tackling it the right way around. For example, the greatest number of businesses across the European Union, something like 80% of the total, are SMEs. It is often said that if SMEs took on 
defaultjust 
defaultone new employee, there would be no unemployment. I was trying to wrack my brain about why we 
defaultare 
defaultnot somehow putting the onus on to the SMEs
default.
default It is in their interests that there should be no youth unemployment, because it is a drain on the economy. It is certainly in their interests that they should get more productivity by having more people, because that generates growth and therefore increases our economic prosperity. Is there anything that any of you have thought about that we could say to the Commission? Why do we not turn this around and put the onus on the SMEs? You cannot order them to do it, but you could cajole them and make it worth their while to consider that. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: I think SMEs have been reluctant to engage with a number of initiatives because of the perceived bureaucracy around them. To a small business, that potential bureaucracy can be quite off-putting. Also, in a larger organisation with its own learning and development department, there are mechanisms to recruit, manage, train and look after young people joining programmes. Within an SME I guess 
defaultit 
defaultis very much down to the business owner to manage everything in relation to taking on a young person. 
defaultBaroness O'Cathain:default Is it the case that the SMEs are leaving the responsibility to the Commission, and that there should perhaps therefore be some involvement by all of us?
defaultLinda Deandefault: Yes, I agree. One of the areas, and I know that the Government are looking at this at the moment, is the apprenticeship agenda. We know that one in 10 SMEs and three in 10 large employers
default 
defaulthave an apprentice, so while employers have made a contribution there is clearly still more to do. That is one area that should be focused on, but without forgetting those young people who are still so far away that they are not at the point where they can access the apprenticeship, skills or training because they do not leave their street, estate or local community. They tend to be the long-term unemployed. For me it would be a question of making sure that we balance effort and energy, to get that synergy when we have 
defaultgot 
defaultthose young people engaged and able to take the opportunities that SMEs have then made available. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: There are some fledgling schemes out there around apprenticeship training agencies. Prospects has been involved in one within the Bradford district and across the Leeds city region, which is exactly about taking on the SMEs
default’
default responsibility for employment so that it can try the young person in a job without the responsibility. It will be interesting to see how they pan out. Within what was the Future Jobs Fund, which has been slightly recreated in our region, there is an opportunity to do that process wherein an employer can try a young person—but I think that has often ended up being in the public sector. The challenge is to get that Future Jobs Fund model into the private sector. 
defaultBaroness O'Cathain:default I think that too. Perhaps we ought 
defaultjust 
defaultto think about that. 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: To add to what colleagues have said, it is an important question that goes back to the previous question about sustainability. Something that ESF funding has enabled us to do is to support huge numbers of young people who we would not otherwise have been able to
default support
default. Through the Prince’s Trust alone, ESF has helped to support about 20,000 young people. However, a really sustainable strategy needs to look at both sides of the equation. The first is the supply bit. As we have mentioned, we can really help the young people we are working with to be in a better competitive position when they are in front of an employer. But at the same time we have to look at the fundamental issue that lots of those entry-level jobs have gone, and how we address the demand side as well. SMEs will become part of the answer there and enterprise will be another part. We need to find a way of working with SMEs that is not overly burdensome. We have to look at that demand side as well, or the strategy will not be sustainable. 
defaultQ55 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Brooke of Alverthorpe:default Following Baroness O’Cathain’s point, I was rather surprised that Prospects said in its e
defaultvidence at paragraph 3.5.2 that,
default “While employers have an important part to play in providing access to employment and training opportunities, moves to shift the cost of apprenticeship provision from government to business may have a detrimental effect on the quality and availability of opportunities and on the outcomes for apprentices”. That really is a case against SMEs and business taking the responsibility for providing the employment opportunities there. Could you develop that a bit further? It seems to me that if we accept that there is a point on the demand side, which Baroness O’Cathain has made, you may need incentives in one form or another to create that attraction for training people or taking them on. But here in your evidence, you are saying, “No, keep it with the Government”. 
defaultBaroness O'Cathain:default You could do it with different levels of corporation tax, for example. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: I think that we are saying the same thing; maybe we have not said it clearly enough in that paragraph. We are saying that when the full responsibility, from the start, goes to the employer, they are less likely to take a young person on. In that paragraph, we are suggesting that to increase apprenticeship numbers, more support from government, certainly in the initial stages—
defaultLord Brooke of Alverthorpe:default It does not quite read like that. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: Does it not? 
defaultBaroness Valentine:default To comment briefly on SMEs, at London First we have employed an apprentice annually for the past five years. The intermediaries who you were touching on, who will take the employment risk away from the SME, are quite good. It is actually quite easy now to take on an apprentice without being worried that you have somehow saddled yourself with someone 
defaultwho 
defaultyou do not want to employ and then do not know what to do with. However, we also regard having an apprentice as a cost to the business. We had started putting them straight into jobs, and we have never yet found anyone who was ready to go straight into a job. We now simply mentor for a year, so it is a straight hit to the bottom line. We do it because we think that we should. 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Shall we go on to the next question? Lord Haskel. 
defaultLord Haskel:default Question 4?
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default I beg your pardon. It is Lord Fearn on Question 3. 
defaultQ56 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Fearn:default What in your view is the role that employers should take in tackling youth unemployment? Do you believe that their response is adequate in the current circumstances? 
defaultLinda Deandefault: I think that we have covered this, really. From our perspective, employers can offer work placements, traineeships and apprenticeships. That is a rich offer. Employers see the benefit to their community, particularly where they are an SME, and young people bring fresh and innovative ideas. Employers, as Baroness Valentine indicated, need support both with identifying the young person and with mentoring them as they may not in the first instance be able to contribute. But as we have already indicated, one in 10 SMEs and three out of 10 large employers are currently engaging with the apprenticeship programme. So there is more scope and opportunity there. 
defaultLord Fearn:default Do they have the opportunity to talk to management? Or does management talk to them?
defaultLinda Deandefault: Apprentices?
defaultLord Fearn:default Yes.
defaultLinda Deandefault: That they engage with the management within their employers? I would hope so. That would certainly always be the aspiration. Part of the mentoring process for apprentices 
defaultunder
default employers is that they sit down with their supervisor and that there is that dialogue and communication. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: There is a role for employers, and a lot of willingness to get involved before young people become unemployed, so it is the involvement of employers within schools. There is a challenge there in that, left to market forces, our best performing schools tend to attract the employers who are naturally linked to them through parents, governors and whatever. There is a challenge in helping to make sure that some of that richness also goes into schools where young people will have had much less contact naturally with employers and employment. 
defaultLord Haskel:default Rosemary Watt-Wyness said earlier that she was looking for young people to be more enterprising, to have a more enterprising attitude. In your evidence, the Prince’s Trust says, “Self-employment is one of the few positive options open”. Do you think that there is a large number of young people who could be supported into taking this route and starting their own businesses?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I think that self-employment could be a viable alternative for considerably greater numbers of young people than it is currently open to. Certainly, 
defaultyoung people’s attitudes to
default self-employment seem to be changing. Prince’s Trust surveys show that a considerable group of young people expect to move into self-employment. One study that we did found that 25% of young people were expecting to be self-employed within the next five years. There is a moment when we can really help them to do that. For some areas of business, start-up costs have come down a lot, so young people do not necessarily have to have the same amount of financial backing that they did previously.  You can start up very small, which means that it is more viable for more people. Some of the groups of young people you were talking about, 
defaultsuch as 
defaultpeople with an offending history, are going to be struggling when there is a lot of choice for employers between different young people. However, self-employment can be a real option for young people with an offending record. We need to make sure that policies align to really support young people in moving into self employment. We do have a concern that under universal credit there will be a one-year start-up period for young people. None of the entrepreneurs who work with the Prince’s Trust think that that is long enough to get from start-up to a business that is paying you the assumed income to live on. We would like to see a bit more support from policy there. There are a lot of young people who are interested in enterprise. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: It is worth mentioning the experience in 
defaultWales
default, where the 
defaultYouth Entrepreneurship Service
default targets those aged five to 25. That is a European-funded initiative 
defaultthat
default takes business role models into schools and offers entrepreneurial challenges to young people right down into primary schools within 
defaultWales
default. Over a period of 10 years, that programme has seen a trebling in the number of young people who are actively engaged in entrepreneurial activities. It potentially has quite a strong impact. Again, I go back to this aspect, which I mentioned earlier, of the need to work within schools with much younger people to help to develop some of these sorts of skills. It is also worth mentioning briefly that entrepreneurial skills would be valued by many employers as equally valuable and useful in employed life as they are for people starting their own business as well. 
defaultLord Haskel:default What sort of support, then, would you give for this? Would it be IT training, money or just mentoring, for instance?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: It is interesting. The thing that young people consistently tell us is the most important support that they get from the Prince’s Trust is mentoring. It is the support that they get from somebody who has more experience, often from running their own business. That mentoring is absolutely crucial. Financial support is important, but not all the young people who we work with even take up the financial support that might be on offer. They see the mentoring as more important and do not want to risk having a debt attached to them in the form of a loan. Mentoring would therefore be my number one but, as I say, it is important that we make sure that our policy and benefits framework encourages young people to start up businesses. I know that there is a balance to be struck. Clearly we cannot support young people indefinitely on benefits while they say that they are starting up a business. However, one year under arrangements for universal credit certainly feels too short and runs the risk that young people who will be able to persist in setting up a business will be those who have recourse to some other form of financial support. We will end up with 
defaultthe 
defaultrisk that disadvantaged young people will not be able to set up a business, but young people who can look to family or friends for financial support for their business will. 
defaultBaroness Hooper:default I would be interested to know
default whether
default you have found that there are regional variations, and that perhaps more young people move into self-employment in areas where self-employment has been traditional. I know that the example of 
defaultWales
default has been given to us, but that was in fact a regionally sponsored scheme and we are talking about the initiative coming more from the young people. Is there any variation?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: That is a really interesting question. Certainly, the response that we were getting, of young people saying that they were really interested in the prospect of self-employment, 
defaultwas
default obviously going to be from a fairly small sample compared to a country. That was nationally based rather than regionally based, but I cannot tell you the regional breakdown within that. My sense anecdotally
default is that 
defaultwe have much more awareness about enterprise among young people. There is more on TV about enterprise. Young people, if they are finding it difficult to get a job, are going to be thinking, “What else can I do?”. We are trying to get the message out there about enterprise. I doubt 
defaultthat 
defaultit is limited to places 
defaultthat 
defaulthave historically been a bit stronger. 
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default I think that if we are going to allow our witnesses to go at the scheduled time, we will have to be self-restrained on the supplementaries. So let us have the key supplementaries but, please, with a bit of restraint. 
defaultQ57 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultBaroness Hooper:default We are a European Select Committee, looking at proposals 
defaultthat 
defaultaffect all of 
defaultEurope
default. Reference has been made to European social funding and one or two other schemes. How valuable do you feel these EU initiatives are or have been? Currently there are the European youth guarantee and the new 
defaultS
defaultocial 
defaultF
defaultund programme. Are you aware of how these are acted upon in other parts of the European Union? Do you have partnerships with any other countries with the schemes in which you are involved?
defaultLinda Deandefault: We have no current collaboration. Clearly, as part of our own research and development as an organisation we look at what is happening in other 
defaultM
defaultember 
defaultS
defaulttates, but we have no links. The European programmes are valuable. They have been successful and, as Rosemary has touched upon and I think others will, they have enabled us to work with young people with whom we would not otherwise have been able to engage. There are two key points. 
defaultThe activity that the young people are engaged in
default need
defaults
default to be of meaningful duration. The research that we have suggests that, at less than six months, the ability to sustain and secure employment thereafter is less than that of a nine-month or 12-month programme. On meaningful duration, I have no research or evidence on this
default,
default but if we continually recontract after two or three years it would be more helpful to look at these programmes for five or six years. Then we could see if that makes a difference. 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: As I said, they are really valuable. Certainly, we do not have a lot of direct collaboration. We do participate in some European research projects. We have some awareness of what is going on around things like the youth guarantee. Certainly, it is important that ESF funding continues to focus on people who are further away from the labour market and on some structural initiatives, trying to provide the kinds of training that will link people up with the sectors where there are growing numbers of jobs. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: I will leave the collaboration elements to Michael, but I have a comment on the youth guarantee. Obviously, we have been involved in delivering the September guarantee, which is a year
default 
default11 version of what I understand is being proposed. It is clearly an exciting and positive development. There are some in-built issues 
defaultthat 
defaultwill need to be addressed around offering what, for many young people, will potentially look like an education place post-19 when that would not currently be the case.  Quite a bit of unpicking underneath that will need to be done. I guess that there is some level of concern around the five regional areas with unemployment above 25%. The rationale for that is very clear
default,
default and I understand that, but it will mean that for some young people—I imagine particularly in 
defaultLondon
default—an element of postcode lottery will come into whether or not they can access quite a good, enhanced offer. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: I am not aware of any current European collaboration in projects that we are delivering. We 
defaulthave 
defaultcertainly collaborated with European partners in the past, more so on the research side, rather as Rosemary has mentioned. Greater collaboration would be valuable and should be encouraged. 
defaultQ58 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Brooke of Alverthorpe:default To a degree, we may have already addressed the issue of where the solution lies. There is plenty of evidence about the amount of evaluation 
defaultthat 
defaultis undertaken on young people and unemployment, and evidence and best practice guidance on how to help young unemployed people most effectively. There is a lot of it around, and we have heard more of it today. If so much 
defaultis 
defaultalready known about the problem and it has been around for so long, and 
defaultit 
defaultseems in some respects from your opening remarks to be getting worse at the moment, what can we do to try to improve our collective performance
default,
default which may be different from what we have done in the past? As we have just touched on the European dimension, is there anything new that 
defaultEurope
default can offer this country? Could we be looking to 
defaultEurope
default for greater assistance?
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: There are a couple of issues I would raise, one of which is the short-term nature of some funding programmes, meaning that just as programmes are building up that body of successful practice and delivery, a new round of funding starts and the delivery partners have to be reworked and new initiatives have to be designed. It is also worth mentioning that the competitive nature of bidding can get in the way of the sharing of good practice. In terms of doing something a bit differently, the element of projects’ legacy might be strengthened within funding arrangements to ensure that it is perhaps taken more seriou
defaultsly and that the lessons learnt
default are translated into future delivery. 
defaultJenny Cryerdefault:
default C
defaultlearly the most vulnerable young people are the ones who are struggling the most with the job market, and they fit the least neatly into some of the constraints around the EU programme. We can end up with a mismatch there. 
defaultLord Brooke of Alverthorpe:default So how do we get to identifying what needs to be delivered or offered to them?
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: We probably need to do a bigger piece of work about listening to those young people and truly understanding some of the pushes and pulls. One of our contracts is a “leaving the care service” contract. There are certainly a whole number of factors 
defaultthat 
defaultinfluence young people supported through that service 
defaultthat 
defaultare push and pull drivers for them accessing and sustaining work. 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: 
defaultT
defaulthe part of the question that is about how we can do better
default relates to 
defaultsome of the things that we have talked about. It is about having ideas on both sides of the equation, both about how we help individual young people to be more competitive and how we stimulate more opportunities for them. There is certainly a job to be done 
defaulton 
defaultcareers contact and helping young people right the way through school to get a much better grip on what they are going to need to be able to offer and do. On the point about the financial accessibility of training programmes for young people, we have to look at 
defaultthat 
defaultand agree about 
defaultit
default. There are all sorts of factors at play there. We have had young people not being able to do training because their parents have said, “Well, I will lose benefit if you are in training”. It is complex, but we really have to look at that. 
defaultOn the 
defaultpoint about 
defaultEU support and enterprise, there are
default industries where there is need
default certainly for things like digital skills. We have to get better at helping to get that information right through the system and then helping young people to develop those skills. There is real potential with traineeships to take young people with some aptitude but without qualifications and to help them build towards some of these higher-skilled opportunities. 
defaultLinda Deandefault: On what we need to do better, 
defaultwe need to do better in 
defaultsupply and demand. As Rosemary said, we need to better engage with the young people but also make sure that there are employers to support them. We need to review the financial support to ensure that 
defaultthe 
defaultyoung people with the greatest need can actually access the training and employability provision that is available. There is an oppor
defaulttunity to better connect health
default, housing, employability and skills and create pathways across. For example, I am aware of some training that has been delivered in the 
defaultManchester
default area that is being funded through health, supporting mental health and well-being. 
defaultA
defaultn outcome from that could clearly lead into skills. However, these tend to sit alone in silos. We need to join those types of activity together. We need to engage young people in a dialogue. I know that we refer to “young people” here, but we know that they are not a homogenous mass. Clearly, there are a number of different push and pull factors in there, as Jenny and Rosemary said. We must ensure that the programmes are of sufficient time, not just in terms of contract length but in terms of enabling the young person to access the benefit. Historically, some of the European programmes 
defaultthat 
defaultwe have had have been six or 12 weeks. In that time, you will have just secured a young person’s trust and not been able to move them on to the next step. Those are the key things.
defaultQ59 default&#xa0; 
default 
defaultLord Cotter:default We are getting near to the end of our time, so I will be brief and to the point, and perhaps ask for answers in the future. You have just spoken about young people engaged in dialogue. For those who believe in young people, and most of us do, we must be looking to them to say what they think can be done, and we must listen. To what extent do young people themselves contribute to ideas as to how they may be helped? Are they consulted about what might be effective? What steps do you or others take to involve young people in policy discussions, and with what results? It could be very productive. It must be essential. We in our Committee are struggling to identify how we can have young people here, o
defaultr in other ways, to say, “
defaultQue pasa
default? What do you think?”, and so on. We are probably short of time, so I ask for a quick answer
default,
default and maybe afterwards for you to send us some ideas. 
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: We try to involve young people in lots of different ways. Some of the survey stuff I have already talked about, and one of their two big things has been more training programmes. They feel that the number one barrier to employment for them is a lack of jobs, 
defaultwhich 
defaultis on the demand side. They also talked about this financial accessibility problem. We do things like that with formal surveys. We also have young people as part of internal discussions when we are talking about programme design. We have had a range of events where we have taken groups of young people to talk to BIS and DWP. Those are really productive sessions. There are some things that you just could not think about if you were not living the experience. We talked with DWP about young people’s experiences of jobcentres. One of the things that really struck me was one young woman
default saying
default, “Yeah, it can be really intimidating. You turn up and there are two great big bouncers on the door”. You would
default not
default think that unless you were living
default it, so it is hugely important.
defaultJenny Cryerdefault: We use all sorts of methodology. We are doing quite a bit more with social media than we have previously. We are using our quite active Facebook pages and working in a couple of other areas. On probably the most powerful piece that I have seen, 
defaultwe 
defaultrecently tendered for two quite large contracts and young people have been involved in writing the specification and commissioning the contracts. That enables them to be genuinely powerful in the process, as opposed to being consulted marginally as we go through. 
defaultLinda Deandefault: We agree that the key to finding success is to actually consult the beneficiaries who are going to have a positive experience or otherwise. 
defaultA
defaultlong with other colleagues
default I 
defaultwould welcome an opportunity, if it was appropriate, to facilitate young people feeding directly into this. We currently consult our young people through a whole range of forums and conferences. They present to us as a senior management team every eight weeks and hold us to account for the things that we pledged to them
default. T
defaulthey come back and check, so that is one of my most anxious meetings. We find that the majority of our young 
defaultpeople are articulate, clear, 
defaultfocused and helpful in ensuring that we both understand and provide them with 
defaultw
defaulthat they need. Something that may translate across is that we are currently in the process of employing two young people who have been furthest away from the labour market and have had a series of experiences in their lives. The idea is that they are going to work with us while we go through business planning. They are going to be allocated to our senior management team to take us through our business planning process, looking at our policy at a Rathbone level—obviously not at a wider level. We have had young people at the young parliamentary group Youth Select Committee earlier in the month as well. That is helpful and useful. 
defaultMichael Larbalestierdefault: It is hugely valuable to involve service users in the design
default, 
defaultdelivery, development and enhancement of
default services
default, and to do so in an inclusive way. By way of a brief example, services in some of the aspects of our business are 
defaultincreasingly 
defaultbeing delivered digitally. In one area, we worked with Barnardo’s and young people with learning difficulties to introduce a number of enhancements to some software that we were preparing to introduce to deliver services to young people in that area. That was extremely valuable. There was a huge impact as a result, which led to many changes
default to that particular technology.
defaultQ60 default&#xa0; 
defaultEarl of defaultLiverpooldefault:default Rosemary, you mentioned earlier that in a study you had done, 25% of young people expected to be self-employed within five years. That was an aspiration or expectation.
default 
defaultI wonder what happens in reality
default.
default Is it anywhere near 25%?
defaultRosemary Watt-Wynessdefault: I suppose that they are not exact cohorts. We did not do a follow-up study with that same group, so unfortunately we do not 
defaultknow 
defaultexactly what happened. On our enterprise programme, we start off with a four-day course called Explorer Enterprise, which is all about helping young people who think that they have an interest in enterprise to establish whether they really do
default and 
defaultwhether it is the right time for them
default,
default and to really think that through. The conversion rate from that to an actual start-up is around 25%.  
defaultThe defaultActing defaultChairman:default Thank you all very much indeed. If, perchance, after you have gone away, past the bouncers at the door
default, who 
defaultwe do not have here
default, 
defaultand you suddenly think of something 
defaultthat 
defaultwould help the 
defaultC
defaultommittee in the programme that we are doing, please get in touch with us. 
default&#xa0;
default