&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Bob Ward and Naomi Hicks, 
defaultGrantham Research Institute 
defaulton
default Climate Change and the Environment
default (IPC0051)
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy (CCCEP)default was established in 2008 to advance public and private action on climate change through rigorous, innovative research. The Centre is hosted jointly by the Uni
defaultversity of Leeds and the London School of Economics and Political Science. It is funded by the UK Economic and Social Research Council and Munich Re. More information about the Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy can be found at: http://www.ccce
defaultp.ac.uk
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment defaultwas established in 2008 at the London School of Economics and Political Science. The Institute bring
defaults
default together international expertise on economics, as well as finance, geography, the environment, international development and political economy to establish a world-leading centre for policy-relevant research, teaching and training in climate change and th
defaulte environment. It is funded by the Grantham Foundation for the Protection of the Environment, which also funds the Grantham Institute for Climate Change at Imperial College London. More information about the Grantham Research Institute can be found at: htt
defaultp://www.lse.ac.uk/grantham/
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThis policy paper is intended to inform decision-makers in the pu
defaultblic, private and third sectors. It has been reviewed by at least 
defaultone
default internal referee before publication. T
defaulthe views expressed in this paper represent those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent those of the host institutions or funders.
defaultIntroductiondefaultThe Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment 
default(
defaulthttp://www.lse.ac.uk/grantham
default) and the Centre for Climate 
defaultChange Economics and Policy (
defaulthttp://www.cccep.ac.uk
default) welcome
default th
defaulte
default opportunity to respond to this 
defaultcall for evidence by the Energy and Climate 
defaultChange
default Committee on the “
defaultIPCC 5
defaultth
default Assessment Review”.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis response draws on
default a number of Grantham Research Ins
defaulttitute publications, including ‘
defaultRecent and future chang
defaultes in the global and UK climate’
default by Bob Ward and Naomi Hicks, and a policy briefing note 
defaulton ‘T
defaulthe UK Climate Change Act
default’
default by Bob Ward, Samuela Bassi and Dimitri Zengheli
defaults
default of the Grantham Research Institute
default, alongside expert reports from a number of relevant
default organisations
default including the Committee on Climate Change and the Met Office. 
default&#xa0;defaultResponse to select questionsdefault&#xa0;defaultQ1. defaultHow robust are the conclusions in the AR5 Physical defaultScience Basis report? Have the IPCC adequately addresses criticisms of previous reports? How much scope is there to question the report’s conclusions?default&#xa0;default1. 
defaultWe note that, 
defaultat the time of the Select Committee’s inquiry, the IPCC has only published a version of
default working group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report that has not been fully copy edited. Although the main findings of the report are unlikely to be different in the final version of the report, which is due for publication in January 2014, ther
defaulte may be some 
defaultsmall but significant changes to the text, for instance with respect to carbon emissions budgets.
default&#xa0;
default2. Working group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report
default is the most comprehens
defaultive 
defaultreview
default of the 
defaultevidence for the 
defaultphysical 
defaultscience basi
defaults of climate change that has ever been written. It has been prepared 
defaultby 259 scientific experts from 
defaultuniversities and research institutes in 39 countries, who have
default reviewed all of the available 
defaultevidence and research, including thousands of scientific papers
default. More tha
defaultn 9000 individual 
defaultscientific pape
defaultrs are cited within the report. 
defaultIt is also one of the most rigorously reviewed scientific docume
defaultnts in history, with more than 
default50,000 comments made during a review process for earlier dr
defaultafts that was made open to 
defaultall 
defaultexperts around the world.
default 
defaultThe report has been written for the 195 member governments of the IPCC, and represents the most authoritative assessment of the state of knowledge about
default the physical science basis of 
defaultclimate change. It should also inform decis
defaultion-making at
default local, regional, national and 
defaultinternational level.
default&#xa0;
default3. While working group I’s contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report shows increases in knowledge and understanding about the physical science basis for climate change since the publi
defaultcation in 2007 of the Fourth Assessment Report, the fundamental conclusions are the same: the Earth is 
defaultwarming primarily due to human activities, and there is a high likelihood of a rise in global average 
defaultsurface 
defaulttemperature of much more than 2˚C, and othe
defaultr very significant changes in the global climate, by the end of this century if annual emissions of greenhouse gases are not sharply reduced.
default&#xa0;
default4. The contribution of working group I of the Fifth Assessment Report is the most authoritative report on the 
defaultphysical science basis of climate change that has ever been published. However, in some minor respects, it is already out of date by virtue of the fact that no papers that were accepted after 15 March 2013 for publication have been considered. This is part
defaulticularly important, for instance, in relation to the so-called recent slowdown in the rise of global average surface temperature.
default&#xa0;
default5
default. It should also be noted that the contribution of working group I to previous IPCC assessment reports may have under-estimated the pace at which climate change is occurring. Brysse 
defaultet al.
default (2012) concluded 
defaultthat 
default“
defaultat least some of the key attributes of globa
defaultl warming from increased atmospheric greenhouse gases have been under-predicted, particularly in IPCC assessments of the physical science, by Working Group I”
default.
default&#xa0;
default6. It is a matter of some concern that the contribution of working group I to the Fifth Assessm
defaultent Report intentionally omitted any explicit consideration of the overall consequences of a rise in global average surface temperature of more than 2˚C, which all governments have agreed s
defaulthould be avoided. This omission
default is perhaps the biggest shortcoming 
defaultof working group I’s contribution to the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report.
default&#xa0;
default7. 
defaultFollowing the discovery in 2010 of a small but significant mistake in the contribution of working group II to the Fourth Assessment Report, the IPCC invited the InterAcademy Council
default (IAC) to review its processes and procedures The report of the IAC’s review, published in 2010, did not make any specific criticisms of the contribution of working group I, but made a number of recommendations for improving the preparation of assessment r
defaulteports. Many of these recommendations were implemented during the compilation of working group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report.
default&#xa0;
default8
default. T
defaulthe IPCC sought to allow any interested individuals or organisations to participate in the review of early d
defaultrafts of working group I’s contribution, including a number of so-called climate change ‘sceptics’
default. 
defaultOne of these ‘sceptics’, 
defaultAlex Rawls, 
defaultpublished a draft of working group I’s contribution, in clear breach of the agreem
defaultent undertaken by all reviewers, and 
defaultattempted to misrepresent its contents (see Ward, 2012). The other contributions to the Fifth Assessment Report have also suffered similar breaches in what appears to be a concerted effort by climate change ‘sceptics’ to subvert and undermine the IPCC proc
defaultess.
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultThere was also a co-ordinated effort by the Global Warming Policy Foundation and its supporters to mislead the public and policy-makers through inaccurate articles 
defaultcriticising
default the contribution of working group I after the Summary for Policymakers 
defaultwas published on 27 September. Some of the most blatant efforts are described in Ward (2013a). We note that possibly the most egregious article was produced by Rt Hon Peter Lilley MP, who is a member of the Select Committee and Vice-Chairman of Tethys Petr
defaultoleum, for ‘City A.M.’ (Ward 2013b). Mr Lilley not only misrepresented the content of the Summary for Policymakers, but also provided a false portrayal of the IPCC and its processes.
default&#xa0;defaultQ2. To what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate defaultscientists?default&#xa0;default10
default. There is a clear scientific consensus that the Earth is warming due to human activities, such as burning fossil fuels and deforestation. There are four main ways in which this consensus manifests itself
default (Ward &amp; Hicks, 2013)
default.
default First, t
defaulthe 259
default authors of 
defaultthe contribution of
default 
defaultIPCC 
defaultworking group I 
defaultto the Fifth Assessment Report 
defaulthave assessed all of the available research and 
default 
defaultevidence and concluded that it is 95 per cent probable that most of the war
defaultming since 1950 is 
defaultdue to human activities.
default Seco
defaultnd, a
defaultnalyses of peer-reviewed journal papers (e.g. Oreskes, 2004; Powell, 2012; Cook et al., 2013)
default 
defaultshow that less than 1 per cent disagree that human activities are th
defaulte major contributor to climate 
defaultchange.
default Third, s
defaulturveys (e.g. Doran &amp; Zimmerman, 2009) show
default that more than 97 per cent of climate researchers who are publishing scientific papers agree that human activity is a sig
defaultnificant contributor to rising 
defaultglobal average temperature.
default Fourth, a
defaultll of the world’s major scientific organisations, including nation
defaultal academies of science such as the Royal Society, agree that human activities are the major contributor to recent climate change.
default&#xa0;defaultQ4. How effective is AR5 and the summary for policymakers in conveying what is meant by uncertainty in scientific tedefaultrdefaultms? Woudefaultld a focus on risk ratdefaulther than uncertainty be useful?default&#xa0;default11
default. 
defaultThe 
defaultcontribution of working group I to the Fifth Assessment Report
default, like 
defaultits
default contribution
default to 
defaultthe Fourth Assessment Report
default, 
defaultcombines quantified levels of confidence 
defaultwith
default probability levels
default,
default and 
defaultqualifies
default scientific
default statements with a level of likelihood – 
defaultranging from
default “virtually certain
default” to “exceptionally unlikely”
default - 
defaultwith associated percentage values
default. 
defaultYet, these expressions of likelihood, when cited without the associated percentage values, may no
defaultt be interpreted in 
defaultthe same
default way by different individuals
default (
defaultsee 
defaultBudescu 
defaultet al
default.
default, 2009).
default&#xa0;
default1
default2
default. 
defaultFraming climate 
defaultchange in terms of uncertainties
default rather than risk
defaults
default 
defaultmay 
defaultcreate 
defaultan obstacle to 
defaultinformed 
defaultdecision-making
default 
defaultabout
default climate change
default mitigation
default, 
defaultas it might 
defaultlead to a misinterpretation that there is no disadvantage in delaying until further certainty is attained
default. 
defaultPainter (2013
default) 
defaults
defaultuggested
default that
default 
defaultan argument
default in favour of using the language of risk is that 
default“
defaultit shifts public debate 
defaultaway from the idea that decisions 
defaultshould be delayed until conclusive proof or absolute certainty is obtained (a criteri
defaulton that may never be satisfied)
default”
default.
default&#xa0;
default13. Smith and Stern (2011) discuss the importance of scientists providing information about uncertainty, particularly of possible future
default climate change, in a way that promotes a better understanding by policy-makers of the risks.
default&#xa0;defaultQ6. Has AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?default&#xa0;default1
default4
default. 
defaultThere has been a 
defaultcampaign by clim
defaultate change ‘sceptics’ to mislead the public, journalists and policy-makers about the significance of the 
defaultlower
default rate of increase in global average surface temperature since 1998 compared with the long-term warming rate since 19
default51
default. IPCC working group I was f
defaultorced to respond to this campaign by addressing the issue explicitly in its contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report.
default It attributed
default the 
defaultlower
default rate of warming 
defaultsince 1998 
defaultmainly 
defaultto
default the impact of 
defaultshort-term natural factors that mask the warming effec
defaultt of greenhouse gases, such as 
defaultan increase in the amount of heat absorbed by the deeper oce
defaultans compared with the surface, 
defaultan increase in the amount of volcanic particles in the a
defaulttmosphere which block out some 
defaultsunlight and cause cooling, and a cyclical redu
defaultction in the amount of radiation from the sun
default.
default&#xa0;
default15
default. The contribution of working group I only considered research papers that were accepted before 15 March 2013 for publication. Since that date, new papers have been published which have added to the knowledge and understanding of the apparent lower rate of
default warming since 1998. For instance, a paper by Cowtan and Way, published in November 2013, concluded that the 
defaultMet Office’s 
defaultHadCRUT4 record of global average surface temperature has significantly underestimated the rate of warming since 1997.
default&#xa0;
default16
default. It is impo
defaultrtant to consider the lower rate of warming since 1998 within the context of the longer record of global average temperature. T
defaulthere are many other such tempora
defaultry periods of higher and lower 
defaultrates of warming, and even of cooling, within the temperature re
defaultco
defaultrd. For instance, the linear 
defaulttrend in average annual temperature for the 43-year pe
defaultriod between 1970 and 2012, as 
defaultrecorded in the Met Office’s HadCRUT4 dataset, is +0.165°C per
default decade, but there are shorter 
default15-year periods of lower warming rates, such as 0
default.098°C per
default decade between 1979 and 1993, 
defaultand 0.044°C per decade between 1998 and 2012 
default(Ward and Hicks, 2013).
default&#xa0;
defaultAnnual global averagdefaulte surface temperature 1970-2012defaultSource: Met Office HadCrut4 dataset, 
defaultas plotted in Ward and Hicks (2013)
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ7. Do the AR5 defaultPhysical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic case for action to prevent dangerous climate change?default&#xa0;default17
default. 
defaultWorking group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report does not offer an assessment of the economic impacts of cl
defaultimate change, which will be considered in the contribution of working group II, due for publication in 2014.
default However, working group I does indicate both that both atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, and some of the phys
defaultical impacts of climate change, such as the reduction in the area of Arctic sea ice, have increased since the publication of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report in 2007.
default&#xa0;
default18
default. Stern (2013) warns that many analyses significantly under-estimate the potential ec
defaultonomic 
defaultconsequences
default of unmanaged climate change because of their reliance on the outputs of models, inclu
defaultding those assessed in working group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report, which omit some of the largest risks. Stern (2013) states: “
defaultScien
defaulttists describe the scale of the risks from unmanage
defaultd climate change as potentially 
defaultimmense. However, the scientific models, because they
default omit key factors that are hard 
defaultto capture precisely, appear to substantially underesti
defaultmate these risks. Many economic 
defaultmodels add further gross underassessment of risk bec
defaultause the assumptions built into 
defaultthe economic 
defaultmodelling
default on growth, damages and risks, 
defaultcome close to assuming directly 
defaultthat the impacts and costs will be modest and close 
defaultto excluding the possibility of 
defaultcat
defaultastrophic outcomes. A new generation of models is
default needed in all three of climate 
defaultscience, impact and economics with a still stronger 
defaultfocus on lives and livelihoods, 
defaultincluding the risks of large-scale migration and conflicts.
default”
default&#xa0;defaultQ8. What implications do the defaultIPCC’s conclusions in the AR5 Physical Science Basis report have for policy-making both nationally and internationally? default&#xa0;default19
default. 
defaultSince the publication of 
defaultthe IPCC Fourth Assessment Report
default, governments have agreed that global emissions of greenhouse gases shou
defaultld be reduced urgently in
default order to hold the increase in 
defaultglobal average temperature below 2°C
default, and perhaps below 1.5˚C,
default 
defaultto
default limit the risks of dangerous climate change.
default 
defaultIn addition, Parliament passed the Climate Change Act in 2008, 
defaultrequiring the UK to reduce
default its 
defaultgreenhouse gas emissions by at least 80 per cent by 2050, compared with 1990. The UK 205
default0 
defaultemissions target was set on the basis of interim advice fr
defaultom members of the Committee on 
defaultClimate Change (Turner, 2008), who indicated that it would 
defaultbe consistent
default with the task of 
defaultreducing global annual emissions of greenhouse gases covered by the Kyot
defaulto Protocol, to about 
default20 billion tonnes of carbon-dioxide-equivalent by 2050, in line wi
defaultth the goal of limiting global 
defaultwarming to no more than 2°C by 2100, and creatin
defaultg a low probability of warming of 4°C.
default&#xa0;
default20. Although working group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report omits an explicit consideration of the scientific basis for the 2˚C threshold, it does point
default out
default, for instance,
default that during the last Ice Age interglacial period, which ended about 116,000 
defaultyears ago, global mean surface 
defaulttemperature was at least 2°C warmer than its late 19th century
default level, global sea levels were 
defaultabout 5 to 10 metres higher than today, and the Greenla
defaultnd and Antarctic Ice Sheets were 
defaultmuch 
defaultsmaller.
default This shows that there are significant risks of very serious changes in the climate, even from global warming of 2˚C, which would have severe social and economic consequences for human populations around the wo
defaultrld.
default&#xa0;
default2
default1
default. Working group I’s contribution to the Fifth Assessment Report
default, for the first time in the IPCC’s history, 
defaultconcludes 
defaultthat 
defaultto have at least a 50 per cent 
defaultchance of avoiding warming of more than 2°C above pre-industri
defaultal level, the total cumulative 
defaultam
defaultount of carbon dioxide that is emitted into the atmosphere by
default human activities must be less 
defaultthan about 4440 billion tonnes (equivalent to about 1210 billi
defaulton tonnes of carbon), or about 
default30
default1
default0 billion tonnes when other greenhouse gases and aerosol p
defaultarticles f
defaultrom human activities 
defaultare taken into account.
default 
defaultThe amount of carbon dioxide that was emitted from the late 19th century up to 2011 was between 163
default0
default and 2
default150
default billion tonnes (equivalent to 44
default5
default to 
default585
default billion ton
defaultnes of carbon), 
defaultleaving a remaining budget of bet
defaultween about 8
default6
default0 and 1
default380
default billio
defaultn tonnes (equivalent to 2
default35
default to 
default3
default75
default billion tonnes of carbon) for carbon dioxide and all othe
defaultc
defaultr emissions from human activities
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultQ12. What relevance to the IPCC’s conclusions have in respect of the review of the fourth Carbdefaulton Budget?default&#xa0;
default22. 
defaultThe Committee on Climate Change (2013) has 
defaultcomprehensively assessed this issue
default. It stated: 
default“
defaultAccounting for the latest evidence, our climate objective implies global emissions pathways similar to those we used previously to guide the UK’s 20
default50 target and fourth carbon budget”. However, it also added: “
defaultOur pathways have larger cumulative CO
default2
default emissions than the c
defaultap suggested by IPCC AR5 for a 
default50% probability of remaining below 2°C. This underlines that
default our pathways should be viewed 
defaultas a minimum
default level of effort.
default”
default&#xa0;defaultREFERENCESdefault&#xa0;
defaultBudescu, D. V., Por, H-H., &amp; Broomell, S. B.
default, 2012
default. Effective communication of uncertainty in the IPCC reports. 
defaultClimatic Change
default, 113
default (20
default, 
defaultpp.
default181-200.
default&#xa0;
defaultBrysse, K., Oreskes, N., O’Reilly, J. &amp; Oppenheimer, M., 2012. 
defaultClimate 
defaultchange prediction: Erring on the side of least drama?
default 
defaultGlobal Environmental Change
default, 23 (1), pp.327-337.
default&#xa0;
defaultCommittee on Climate Change, 2013. 
defaultFourth Carbon Budget Review – part 1
defaultAssessment of climate risk and the international response
default. [pdf] London: Committ
defaultee on Climate Change. Available at:
default 
defaulthttp://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/1784-CCC_SI-Report_Book_single_1a.pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultCook, J., Nuccitelli, D., Green, S.A., Richardson, M., Winkler, B., 
defaultPainting, R., Way, R., Jacobs, 
defaultP., &amp; Skuce, A., 2013. Quantifying the consensus on anthr
defaultopogenic global warming in the 
defaultscientific literature. Environmental 
defaultResearch Letters
default, 8 (2), DOI:10.
default1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024
default&#xa0;
defaultCowtan, 
defaultK., and Way, R.G., 2013. 
defaultCoverage bias in the HadCRUT4 temperature series and its
default 
defaultimpact on recent temperature trends.
default [pdf] 
defaultQuarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society
default, 
defaultDOI:
default10.1002/qj.2297
default. Available at:
default 
defaulthttp://www.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/qj.2297/pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultDoran, P.T., &amp; Zimmerman, M.K., 2009. Examining the scientific consensus on climate change. 
defaultEos
default, 90 (3), pp.22.
default&#xa0;
defaultInter
defaultAcademy C
defaultouncil, 2010. 
defaultClimate Change Assessments: Review of the Processes &amp; Procedures of the IPCC
default. [pdf] Amsterdam, Netherlands: InterAcademy Council. Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.interacademycouncil.net/File.aspx?id=27669
default&#xa0;
defaultIntergovernmenta
defaultl Panel on Climate Change, 2013.
default 
defaultClimate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli
defaultmate Change
default. [pdf] 
defaultGeneva: Intergovernmental Pane
defaultl on Climate Change. Available 
defaultat: 
defaulthttp://www.climatechange2013.org/images/uploads/WGIAR5-SPM_Approved27Sep2013.p
defaultdf
default&#xa0;
defaultLilley, P., 2013. Global warming alarmism is no longer scientifically or politically sustainable
default. 
defaultCity A.M.
default, 30 September 2013. Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.cityam.com/article/1380507150/global-warming-alarmism-no-longer-scientifically-or-politically-sustainable
default&#xa0;
defaultOreskes, N., 2004. The scienti
defaultfic consensus on climate change.
default 
defaultScience
default, 306 (5072), pp.1686.
default&#xa0;
defaultPainter
default, J.,
default 2013
default.
default 
defaultClimate Change and the Media: Reporting Risk and Uncertainty
default. London: I. B. Tauris and Co. Ltd.
default&#xa0;
defaultPowell, J.L., 2
default012. Science and global warming.
default Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.jamespowell.org/index.html
default&#xa0;
defaultRoyal Society, 2010. Climate change: a summary of the science. [pdf] Available at: 
defaulthttp://royalsociety.org/uploadedFiles/Royal_Society_Content/
defaultpolicy/publications/2010/4294972962.pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultSmith, L.A., &amp; Stern, N., 2011. Uncertainty in science and its role in climate policy. 
defaultPhilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A
default, 369, pp. 4818-4841.
default&#xa0;
defaultStern, N., 2013. 
defaultThe structure of e
defaultconomic
default modeling o
defaultf the potential i
defaultmpacts
defaultof climate c
defaulthange: 
defaultgrafting g
defaultross
default underestimation of risk onto a
defaultlready
default narrow science m
defaultodels
default. 
defaultJournal of Economic Literature
default, 51
default 
default(3), pp.838-859.
default&#xa0;
defaultTurner, A., 2008. Interim advice by the Committee on Climate 
defaultChange. [pdf] Letter from Lord 
defaultTurner of Ecchinswell to the Secretary of State for Energy 
defaultand Climate Change. 7 October. 
defaultLondon: CCC. Available at:
default 
defaulthttp://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/Interim-report-letter-to-DECC-SofS-071008.pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultWard, B., 2012. 
defaultDesperate shenanigans as climate change 'sceptics' try to misrepresent r
defaulteport
default. 
defaultHuffington Post
default, 14 December 2012. Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/bob-ward/desperate-shenanigans-climate-change-sceptics_b_2299176.html
default&#xa0;
defaultWard, B., 2013a. Global warming sceptics 
defaultusing media campaign to discredit IPCC
default. 
defaultThe Guardian Environment
default, 4 October 2013. Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/04/global
default-warming-sceptics-discredit-ipcc
default&#xa0;
defaultWard, B., 2013b. Letter to Rt Hon Peter Lilley MP, 3 October 2013.
default [pdf]
default Available a
defaultt: 
defaulthttp:/
default/www.lse.ac.uk/GranthamInstitute/Media/Commentary/2013/Feb/letter-bob-ward-peter-lilley-1-october-2013.pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultWard, B. &amp; Hicks, N., 2013. 
defaultRecent and future changes in the global and UK climate
default.
default [pdf]
default 
defaultPolicy brief, October 2013. London: Grantham Research I
defaultnstitute on Climate Change and the Environment and Centre for Climate Change Economics and Policy. Available at: 
defaulthttp://www.lse.ac.uk/
defaultGranthamInstitute/publications/Policy/docs/changes-in-global-and-uk-climate-low-res.pdf
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default