&#xa0;
defaultAFS0035defaultWritten evidence submitted by Michael defaultPykedefaultMichael is a former Deputy Head of an urban comprehensive school.  He is a spokesperson for CASE (The Campaign for State Education) and the submission, although made in a personal capacity, 
defaultis reflective of the policies of CASE.
defaultThis submission addresses the Committee’s terms of reference in order and repeats them
default here
default for convenience.
default  The body of the submission is concerned to 
defaultaddress the first 
defaultterm
default of reference in some detail
default.  The remaining terms of reference are addressed in the summary but
default are not further dealt with.
default 
defaultThere is 
defaultno evidencedefault that 
default“
defaultacademisation
default”
default per se has had 
defaultanydefault effect in narrow
defaulting the gap for disadvantaged children.  
defaultBoth
default within 
defaultand w
defaultit
defaulthout
default the academies system there are three steps
default especially
default that could be taken to bring about a “transformational  impact.”  These are (1) to regulate admissions so
default as to ensure that every school
default 
defaulthas, as far as possible, a socially and academically balanced intake; (2) to develop a more highly educated and mu
defaultch more professionally expert
default teaching force
default, as in countries such as Finland; (3) to raise the Pupil Premium
default and other financial
default 
defaultinstruments 
defaultto a level that is seriously effective in mitigating socio-economic disadvantage.
defaultAlthough highly desirable, these steps would still be less effective than
default fiscal policies designed to reduce inequality.
default 
defaultMoreover, to implement Step1 would require qualities of leadership and political courage of which no party has shown any evidence in recent years.  
default  
default 
defaultIt is abundantly clear that the vast majority of cu
defaultrrent academies have not made a 
defaultfree choice to adopt this status but have been strongly pressured to do so by successive secretaries of state, who have used every means at their disposal, inclu
defaultding
default both financial bribery and
default the misuse of OFSTED
default to override the clear
defaultly expressed wishes of parents and other stakeholders. 
default As the experience of Sweden has shown, there is no case for the
default 
defaultestablishment of so-called “free” schools, which are a misuse 
defaultof taxpayers’ money.
default Moreover, the process by which “free” schools are established is completely lac
defaultk
defaulting in clarity and transparency.  Indeed, in this regard, there is disturbing evidence of the determination of the Secretary of State to thwart the intentions of the Freedom of Information Act.  
defaultAcademy sponsors are not democratically accountable and ought
default to have no say in the expenditure of public money
default.   
default 
default 
defaultIt is already clear that a system in which thousands of sc
defaulthools are directly responsible to the secretary of state is hopelessly impractical, unwieldy and inefficient. 
defaultThe Secretary of State has already recognised the truth of the above by proposing 
defaultthe creation
default of a “middle tier” and has, indeed, begun the process of advertising for “commissioners”.
default  However, this “tier” will consist chiefly of existing head
default 
defaultteachers of academy schools and, as such, will not be democratically accountable.  
defaultAcademy chains are an extremely undesirable 
defaultphenomenon and the potential for the misuse of public money is ob
defaultvious and considerable.  Currently they are not democratically accountable and represent a vehicle whereby the opinions and beliefs of people with no educational expertise may be imposed upon children.
defaultGiven that academy status is inherently of little or no value, it cannot be app
defaultropriate for primary schools
default. 
defaultThere is no evidence that academy status can bring value for money. 
defaultThere is no reason to believe that sponsored academy status will 
defaultmake any significant difference to a failing school, unless such a change is accompanied by other, more pertinent, changes for which academy status is not a necessary condition.
default  In the medium term, it would be very beneficial to ensure that primary school
defaults which serve the most deprived areas are staffed by teachers of experience and proven expertise.  Such teachers should be appropriately remunerated.
default  
default&#xa0;
defaulti) According to long and well establi
defaultshed research findings, with which, of course, the Committee will be familiar, between 15% and 20% of educational outcomes can be attributed to schooling.  This is not an insignificant figure but it nevertheless provides an important context for any discus
defaultsion of how any model of school provision can improve the prospects of children from deprived backgrounds.
default  
defaultii) 
defaultThere is no great secret 
defaultas to why children from deprived backgrounds do relatively poorly at school and there is no need to take up the 
defaultCommittee’s time by rehearsing the reasons
default, all of which have to do with the complex interaction of motivation and resources
default.  The question is how schools can help such children and whether or not the academy model is relevant.  
defaultThe theory behind the model
default is that academy schools, not being bound by the National Curriculum,  are “free to innovate” but this idea, even if true, assumes that the needs of deprived children can be addressed by “innovation” (whatever that means)
default. 
defaultIn terms of curriculum content, a
defaultcademy schools are, of course, no more free to “innovate” than any other type of school, for the simple reason that they are evaluated with reference to their pupils’ performance in “high stakes”, externally administered examinations
default.  They are, of course,
default free to experiment with such things as the length of the school day and the length and number of school terms and they are free, up to a point, to set their own terms and conditions for the employment of teachers but few academy schools have shown any wis
defaulth to make use of these freedoms and there is no reason to suppose that, if they did, it would help to narrow the attainment gap between deprived children and the rest.  These “freedoms” are simply not relevant to the problem.
default  It is, therefore, not surpris
defaulting that, claim
defaults
default to the contrary by the DFE notwithstanding, academy schools overall have failed to bring about any narrowing of the attainment gap between deprived and other children.
default  
defaultOf course, it is possible to point to particular academy schools that 
defaulthave achieved excellent results but to generalise from such examples is not helpful.  A case in point is Mossbourne 
defaultAcademy, which has achieved spectacularly better results than its predecessor, Hackney Downs School.  It is impossible
default, however,
default to show tha
defaultt Mossbourne’s success is in any way due to its status as an academy, rather than to a combination of outstanding leadership, superior resources and a pupil intake
default much less deprived than that of its predecessor.  
defaultIndeed, among the original group of “City 
defaultAcademies” set up by Labour, Mossbourne is almost uniquely successful.  
default 
default  
defaultiii) However, the experience of other countries, most notably Finland, shows that there are measures which could be taken to make school a more positive and successful experience f
defaultor the children under discussion.  Firstly, our
default secondary
default schools should be made genuinely comprehensive in character.  There is considerable evidence, of which the Committee will be aware, that 
defaultthe climate of learning within a school is optimised when a m
defaultinimum of 25% of the pupils are well motivated to succeed and already support the school’s educational aims.  Such children may be called a “critical mass” and their presence in a school has been shown to have a powerful effect upon the motivation of the m
defaultajority of other pupils.  To obtain such a “critical mass” in every school requires admissions policies to be based upon the need for every school to have a socially and academically balanced intake but to achieve this would require a level of leadership a
defaultnd courage that seems no longer
default to exist among our politicians, who, since 1988 have adhered to a consum
defaulterist model of schooling, in which the provision of “choice and diversity” is given priority over the actual effectiveness of outcomes.  
defaultSecondly, our 
defaultteaching force is insufficiently expert to tackle the problems of learning and motivation experienced by most deprived children.  The one year PGCE, although better than nothing, is not a sufficient guarantor of the level of expertise needed.  We should lo
defaultok to adopt the Finnish model
default, in which not only are teachers very highly educated but are then subject to a rigorous selection process, followed by a minimum of three years post-graduate training, with regular occasions for further professional developmen
defaultt.  Thirdly, we should introduce financial instruments which make a seriously significant contribution to reducing the material inequality from which deprived children suffer.  Universally provided free school meals (another Finnish idea) would be a start.
default  The Pupil Premium, although a good idea, is simply too small to make a significant difference.
defaultiv)
default The success of Finnish education reminds us that an aspect of schooling which is regularly ignored in current educational discourse is that of the prestige
default and status which adheres to a school and, therefore, to its pupils.  Britain is a deeply unequal society in which the activities of the rich carry high status and prestige, while those of the poor are largely despised.  
defaultUnfortunately, this also applies to
default the schools which are attended by different sections of society.  The existence of a powerful independent sector, together with the emphasis placed upon “parental choice” within the state system by successive governments has created a hierarchy among our 
defaultschools.  Those schools at the top of the hierarchy are able to exercise considerable influence over admissions and, in effect, choose their pupils.  Those at the bottom are obliged to take the children that
default the more advantaged schools do not want.  Very m
defaultany deprived children already suffer from low morale and low self-esteem and their motivation to succeed at school is not helped by their acute awareness that they attend a school which reinforces their lowly status.  The converse is equally true for child
defaultren who attend a school with high status.  Unfortunately, the continuing development of the academy programme is likely to aggravate, rather than ameliorate this problem, as academies become responsible for their own admissions.  It is to be hoped that the
default Committee will take note that a common characteristic of the world’s most successful education systems is the relative absence of a hierarchy of schools. 
defaultv) All this having been said
default, rather than focus upon the 
defaulteffectsdefault 
defaultof deprivation, it would be far mor
defaulte effective to find ways of reducing
default socio-economic
default inequality.  Of course, this is outside the Committee’s remit but it is simply unrealistic and flying in the face of all evidence, not to mention common sense, to suppose that the education system can eve
defaultr do more than slightly ameliorate the results of structural injustice.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default