&#xa0;
defaultAFS0038defaultWritten Evidence submitdefaultted by Janet Downs, education defaultresearcher and bloggedefaultr for the Local Schools NetworkdefaultThe effectiveness of academisation in narrowing the gap for disadvantaged children and what further steps should be taken w
defaultithin the academies system to bring about a transformati
defaultonal impact on student outcomes
default?
default1 
defaultE
defaultvidence suggests 
defaultsponsored academies are no better than similar non-academies in raising results (Academies Commission 2013
default 
defaulthttp://www.thersa.org/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/1008038/Unleashing-greatness.pdf
default 
default).  Converter academies are mainly schools which were good or outstanding before conversion.  Not all converter ac
defaultademies have maintained this standard post-conversion
default.  Claims confirming Michael Gove’s assertion that converter academies raise results do not exist (Freedom of
default Information response
default 
defaulthttps://www.whatdotheyknow.com/request/statement_by_mr_gove_re_academy
default 
default).
default   The Academies Commission found the claimed advantages of academy conversion were present in non-academies
default (
defaultop cit
default)
default.
default2  
default 
defaultNational Audit Office (2010) found 
defaultthe
default gap in
default attainment between 
defaultdisadvantaged pupils and others has grown wider in academies than in comparable maintained schools
default (
defaulthttp://www.nao.org.uk/report/department-for-
defaulteducation-the-academies-programme/
default )
default.  More recent research 
defaultcomparing
default academi
defaultes with non-academies in bands 
defaultaccording to level of disadvantage (as measured by % of students on free school meals), fi
defaultnds non-academies out-perform
default academies in every band.
default  
default3 
defaultThe Academies Commission 
default(
defaultop cit
default) 
defaultfound some academies were using admission criteria to deter pupils who could have a negative impact on league table position.  It found n
defaultot all academies were committed to social inclusion
default and warned academis
defaultation cou
defaultld have a negative effect on hard-to-place pupils.
default4 
defaultC
defaulthanging the structure of schools 
defaultdoes not
default transform student outcomes as evidenced above.  However, academies exist and they need regular monitoring.  An Ofsted visit every few years is insufficient to s
defaultpot any decline in education provision. Local oversight is essential.  The eight 
defaultRegional C
defaultommissioners who are supposed to do this monitoring will not be as ef
defaultfective as day-to-day oversight 
defaultby local authorities.  The advertisement (
defaultTES 
default6 
default/12/
default2013) for th
defaultese commissioners even suggested they could be part-time positions.  This shows a woeful under-appreciation of the work involved.
defaultThe process for approving, compelling and establishing academies and free schools, including working with sponsors
default5  Recent e
defaultvidence (eg BAU Fou
defaultndation/Mentora Academies Trust
default 
defaulthttp://www.localschoolsnetwork.org.uk/2013/12/how-did-a-private-turkish-university-and-the-carlyle-group-a-global-asset-management-company-end-up-in-the-mix-to-run-three-rural-schools-in-oxfordshire/
default 
default) sugges
defaultts approved academy sponsor 
defaultstatus is
default conferred without due diligence.   The rush to find sponsors, encouraged by financial 
defaultinducements
default (
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sponsored-academies-funding-guidance-for-sponsors
default )
default, appears to take priority
default over suitability
default.  There is also growing evidence that some academy trusts are “vehicles” by which shareholders can receive a r
defaulteturn
default on 
defaulti
defaultnvestment
defaults in linked for-profit companies
default (eg Wey Education Schools Trust was set up as a “vehicle” by Zail Enterprises Ltd, a subsidiary of Wey Education PLC
default.  This is made clear in Wey Education P
defaultLC Preliminary Announcement for year ending 
default31/12/12:
default  
defaulthttp://www.investegate.co.uk/article.aspx?id=201305310700089451F
default 
default).  Again, it appears insufficient attention is 
defaultpaid to discover any potential links w
defaultith for-profit compani
defaultes which c
defaultould pose a conflict of interest.
default6 
defaultThe process of academy conversion does not encourage formal consultation with stakeholders until too late in the process.
default  According to Department for Education rules
default (
defaulthttp://www.education.gov.uk/schools/leadership/typesofschools/academies/b00229234/becoming-an-academy/consultation
default )
default, 
defaultGoverning Bodies are supposed to consult informal
defaultly with 
defaultstakeholders
default before making
default a Resolution to become an academy. 
default  
defaultWhether these informal c
defaultonsultations actually happen
default before Resolutions are passed is unclear.  Formal consultations do not take place until
default after the Secretary of State has given perm
defaultission for conversion to go ahead, academy trusts 
defaulthave been established
default and companies registered with Companies House
default.   
defaultThis gives the impression 
defaultconversion is a done deal.  The Governing Body 
defaultdecide
defaults
default who to consul
defaultt, how the consultation is
default done and the t
defaultimescale
default.
default  This suggests 
defaultGoverning Bodies can get away with minimal consultation.
default7
default 
defaultThere should be a statutory requirement for consu
defaultltations to take place before 
defaultResolution
defaults to convert take
default place.  This requirement should also lay down who is to be consulted, how it is to be done and for how long.
default8
default 
defaultThere is evidence 
defaultschools are being pressurized into becoming academies. 
defaultIn the 
defaultdebate
default on forced academy conversion 
default(Hansard 12/3/13 Column 40WH
default 
defaulthttp://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmhansrd/cm130312/halltext/130312h0001.htm
default )
defaultRosie Cooper MP described 
defaultthe Schools Commissioner, 
defaultD
defaultr 
defaultLiz Sidwell, 
defaultas “
defaultpeddling the Education Secretary’s ideological wares as if she was some kind of snake oil saleswoman
default.”
default  Downhills School is 
defaultan infamous example.   An Ofsted monitoring visit to the school, which was in special measures, judged it to be 
defaultimproving.  But the Secretary of State intervened and pronounced it was failing.  Ofsted returned within less than a term with the same lead inspector and overturned its previous judgement.  Th
defaulte school was handed over to Harris
default against the wishes of the ma
defaultjority of parents.  The career of the head teacher was ruined.
default  This debacle also brought Ofsted into disrepute.
default  
defaultS
defaultuch tactics are unacceptable.  
default 
default9  The duties described in the adve
defaultrtisement  
defaultfor Regional 
defaultCommissioners made it clear
default promoting academy con
defaultversion was an important part of the job, if not the primary duty.  Yet
default,
default as stated above
default,
default 
defaultthere is no evidence 
defaultchanging school structure raises educational standards.  It is not acceptable for taxpayers’ money
default to be used to promote policies which have
default no p
defaultroven benefits and many disadvanta
defaultges including 
defaultthe possibility of taxpayers’ money being diverted from education into shareholders’ pockets.
default10 
defaultSome local authorities appear to be using the academies programme to 
defaultdrop
default 
defaultresponsibility
default 
defaultfor 
defaultschools 
defaultapart from
default statutory requirement
defaults.  Linc
defaultolnshire acts as a case study.
default 
default11 
defaultIn 2011, Lincolnshire
default recommended it should
default 
default“
defaultencourage all schools to j
defaultoin a single Trust through CfBT”
default (
defaultMinutes of Extraordinary Meeting of 
defaultLincolnshire Children and Young P
defaulteople Scrutiny Co
defaultmmittee, 
default26 July 2011
default 
defaulthttp://lincolnshire.moderngov.co.uk/Data/Children%20and%20Young%20People%20Scrutiny%20Commit
defaulttee/20110726/Agenda/Document%201.pdf
default 
default).  
defaultCfBT 
defaultran Lincolnshire’
defaults School Improvement Service and its Directo
defaultr,
default 
defaultAndy Breckon
default, was also 
defaultAssistant Director of Childr
defaulten's Services.  This gave rise to accusations of conflict of interest which the Council deni
defaulted
default (
defaulthttps://www.whatdotheyknow.com/request/84863/response/214163/attach/9/SKMBT%20C55211092209341.pdf
default )
default.
default12 
defaultLincolnshire’s decision to encoura
defaultge academy conversion was motivated by the estimated 
defaultnegative 
defaultimpact 
defaultof academis
defaultation 
defaulton its budget for Children’s Services 
defaultwhich
default would present Lincolnshire with
default “
defaultchallenges in terms of retaining its existing school support service provision and support
defaulting its most vulnerable schools” (Minutes 
defaultop cit
default). 
default  The answer to the problem, then, seemed to lie in passing 
defaultthis 
defaultresponsibility to schools themselves.
default13 Lincolnshire County Council 
defaultmay have come to
default regret its decisi
defaulton
default.   It belatedly realised it was be
defaultcoming difficult, if not impossible, to regulate school place supply when West Grantham Academies Trus
defaultt 
defaultdecided wi
defaultthout consultation to close 
defaultCh
defaultarles Read Academy 
defaultagainst the wishes of parents, pupils and the Council
default (
defaulthttp://www.stamfordmercury.co.uk/news/education/education-news/school-closure-decision-under-fire-from-council-1-4747377
default )
default.  The academy was only saved by th
defaulte Department for Education handing it over to another academy trust
default (
defaulthttp://www.stamfordmercury.co.uk/news/education/educ
defaultation-news/charles-read-academy-saved-from-closure-by-trust-1-5181862
default )
default.
default14 This case study shows the academy conversion programme can encourage local authorities to 
defaultavoid all but statutory duties to 
defaultschools, can encourage schools to join academy chains
default which may not be in the 
defaultbest interests
default of pupils nor value-for-money 
defaultand makes it difficult for local authorities to manage the supply of school places.  Local authorities can no longer commission their own schools – there is a presumption that new school
defaults will be academies or free schools.  Yet the National Audit Office 
default2013 (
defaulthttp://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/10314-001-Free-Schools-Book-Copy.p
defaultdf
default ) found 
defaulthalf of areas where the need for extra school places was high or sever
defaulte
default received no applications 
defaultfrom free school proposers.   L
defaultocal authorities have to tout around for chains or sponsors to set up schools
default when new provision is required
default.
defaultThe 
defaultrole of the Secretary of State in intervening in and supporting failing academies, and how this role will work as the programme expands
default15 
defaultI
defaultn the event of an Academy failing, th
defaulte Department for Education
default allocate
defaults
default a new sponsor to take over the particular institution.
default  The same is true if an academy chain wants to close
default an academy
default.    The choice of sponsor/
defaultacademy chain 
defaultwould not be a Local Aut
defaulthority decision but would be imposed by the Department for Edu
defaultcation.  I
defaultt appears, then, 
defaultacademies are in the gift of the Secretary of State.  This can pave the way for future take-over by for-profit education providers to 
defaultrun
default English academies.
default16 The Regional Commissioners being recruited are supposed to 
defaultauthorise new sponso
defaultrs.  It’s unclear by what criteria the Comm
defaultissioner will judge prospective sponsors
default.   Neither is it clear how the Commissioners, especially those working part-time, will be able to adequately support and intervene failing academies over a much wider area 
defaultthan any local authority.  Local authorities are much better placed to support and challenge local schools than remote bodies.
defaultThe functions and responsibilities in relation to academies and free schools of local authorities and other organisations 
defaultoperating between the Secretary of State and individual schools; what these functions and responsibilities should be; and what gaps there are in su
defaultpport for schools at this level
default17
default 
defaultLocal authorities should be the “middle tier” between the Secretary of Sta
defaultte and individual schools.  They h
defaultave 
defaultlocal knowledge.  Their responsibilities should be towards all the area’s schools whatever their structure: to p
defaultromote co-operation between 
defaultschools
default; to ensure individual 
defaultschools do not act in their own interests to the
default detriment of other schools and particular children; 
defaultto monitor schools admission criteria to ensure they adhere to the Schools Admission  Code; 
defaultto intervene and support 
defaultstruggling school
defaults
default; to ensure academy chains are not using their monopoly to impose pa
defaultrticular methods or resources on their acade
defaultmies and denying heads the 
defaultfreedom they had when they were local authority schools, and to have access to the financial records of academies to ensure there is no misuse of public funds (e
defaultg Priory Federation 
default 
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/news/media-statement-in-relation-to-the-priory-federation-of-academies-trust
default 
default) or nepotism (eg Kings Scien
defaultce Academy
default 
defaulthttp://media.education.gov.uk/assets/files/pdf/i/kings%20science%20academy%20investigation%20report.pdf
default 
default).
default18 
defaultIn summary, locdefaultal defaultauthoritiesdefault have three roles: organizing partnerships; commissioning services, and championing pupils, parents and communities.defaultWhat role academy chains play or should play in the new school landscape; how accountable they are; and what issues they 
defaultraise with regard to governance arrangements
default19 
defaultEarly academy chains (Harris, ARK) were sponsors which offered support, expertise and financial help to their academies.  The need to provide financial backing has 
defaultgone
default – the National Audit Offi
defaultce 2010 
default(
defaultop ci
defaultt
default) 
defaultfound a “significant proportion”
default of pledges had not been honoured in any case.  The National Audit
default Office also expressed concern about conflicts of inte
defaultrest between academies and 
defaultsponsors when the latter exerted pressure on academies to purchase service
defaults
default from them
default.
default20 
defaultThis conflict of interest has become more of an issue as academy chains increasingly 
defaultsupply 
defaultback-office services once 
defaultprovided by local authorities.  Academies are tied into contracts with their chains 
defaultwhich may not be the best value-for-
defaultmo
defaultney or of appropriate standard.  This is exacerbated when chains impose resources, curricula and methods of working on to their academies.  This reduces the autonomy of heads – the Academies Commission 
default(
defaultop cit
default) 
defaultheard evidence from some heads of academies i
defaultn chains that they had less freedom than when they were local authority maintained.  
default21 
defaultWorse, 
defaultthe 
defaultprovision of centralised curricula by a ch
defaultain risks poor quality 
defaultmaterials or methods:  two of the 
defaultfour academies sponsored by 
defaultLearning Schools Trust, the
default c
defaultharitable arm of Kunskapsskola
defaultn
default, the Swedish for-profit education provider, were judged Requires Improvement in Autumn 2013, and a third was judged Inadequate.   Kunskapsskolan schools all follow the “KED education programme” developed by Kunskapsskolan fo
defaultr individual learning.  Ofsted criticised the teaching materials for being pitched incorrectly.
default22
default 
defaultPeje Emilsson
default, chair of Kunskapsskolan, 
defaulthas global ambitions. Another of his firms, 
defaultMagnora
default (
defaulthttp://www.tes.co.uk/article.aspx?storycode=6305024
default )
default, has 
defaultset up a school in Delhi which it hopes will be the start of a school chain
default on the sub-continent
default.
default 
default Indian teachers will be trained in “KED pedagogies”. 
default 
defaultEmilson
default spoke to the US-based, libertarian think-tank, the Cato Institute
default, in 2011
default (
defaulthttp://www.cato.org/multimedia/cato-video/peje-emilsson-discusses-how-scale-g
defaultood-schools
default )
default, where
default he 
defaultsaid 
defaulthis firm could increase test results at a 20% cheaper cost. 
default 
defaultIn the UK, he said, he had told his “Conservative friends” he could do it even more cheaply.
default 
default23
default But cheaply doesn’t always mean adequate.
default  And education is not ju
defaultst about test results: the OECD warned two years ago there was already an excessive emphasis on test results in England which risked negative consequences (
defaultEconomic Survey UK 2011
default).
default24
default 
defaultKunskapsskolan is not the only firm supplying materials.  
defaultThe 
defaultAspirat
defaultio
defaultns Academies Trust operates 
defaultin association with the Quaglia Institute for Student Aspirations (QISA) and Aspirations Unlimited International (AUI)
default (
defaulthttp://www.spacest
defaultudiobanbury.org/266/who-is-the-aspirations-academies-trust
default  )
default. 
default The US-
defaultbas
defaulted QISA and AUI organisations “
defaultoffer significant support by providing aspirations research, materials, surveys, and consultation support.
default”  AUI is a for-profit provider of “
defaultdynami
defaultc assessment tools to assist schools and universities with collecting and analyzing student perspective
default”.   AUI entered into partnership with global education company, Pearson, in 2008
default (
defaulthttp://www.thefreelibrary.com/Pearson+Announces+Partnership+With+Aspirations+Unlimited.-a0180734924
default )
default.
default  
defaultQisa’s
default products and surveys are distributed by Pearson including the My Voice survey 
default(
defaulthttp://myvoice.pearsonfoundation.org/
default )
default 
defaultwhich 
defaultOfsted found was being used 
defaultin Aspirations
default sponsored Rivers Academy.
default  Such links between Trusts and publishers of educational materials provide a 
defaultsteady, pr
defaultofitable
default outlet for the publishers’ products
default but would prevent heads purchasing other materials which they felt more appropriate
default.
default24 Similarly, t
defaulthe 
defaultAurora Academies Trust 
defaultpaid
default £100,000 a year to its American parent
default, Mosaica Education Inc
default (
defaulthttp://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/may/18/academy-pays-for-us-curriculum
default )
default,
default 
defaultfor its schools to use 
defaulti
defaultts patented curriculum.  Ofsted criticised the curriculum which is man
defaultdatory in schools sponsored by Aurora.  Again, this reduces the power of heads to decide curricula and locks schools into contracts to purchase unsuitable materials.
default25 Local authorities do not impo
defaultse uniformity on s
defaultchools.  But m
defaultany academy chains have co
defaultrporate images which promote the chain’s “brand”
default:
default  Harris schools all bear the name of the Harris chain; most Greenwood Dale 
defaultsecondary academies have the same website format
default which makes them almost indistinguishable
default (
defaulthttp://www.greenwoodacademies.org/our-academies/
default )
default.  Future Academies, set up by schools minister Lord Nash, has links with the Curriculum Centre which publishes
default 
defaultthe 
defaultUS 
default“Core
default Knowledge” curriculum developed in the 
default1990s
default by E D Hirsch. It was adapted for the UK by the short-lived head of 
defaultFuture Academies 
defaultPimlico Primary Free S
defaultchool, 
defaultAnnaliese
default Briggs
default (
defaulthttp://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-24466928
default )
default, and published by Civitas. 
default 
defaultIt i
defaults promoted by schools 
defaultminister 
defaultLiz Truss
default 
default(
defaulthttps://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/elizabeth-t
defaultruss-speaks-on-the-national-curriculum-to-the-fellowship-commission
default )
defaultand admired by the Secretary of State.  Three of the four primary schools in Pimlico are Future Academies schools
default (
defaulthttp://www.westendextra.com/news/2013/oct/facing-facts-teaching-fears-pimlico-primary-school-parents-%E2%80%98left-very-little-choice%E2%80%99
default )
default.  There is 
defaultlittle cho
defaultice for 
defaultPimlico 
defaultparents who 
defaultwould prefer a diffe
defaultrent curriculum or for heads who wish to devise their own
default.
default26 Future Academies raises several questions: whether there is a conflict of interest when a minister is so closel
defaulty connected to an academy chain
default and
default whether it is appropriate for other schools ministers to promote materials associated with that chain.
default27 
defaultRecent events at Al-Madinah free school, the Kings Science Academ
defaulty and Discovery New School 
defaultr
defaultaise questions about governance and whether such groups 
defaultare given too much freedom to decide how to spend taxpayers’
default money.  It is unlikely 
defaultthe eight Regional Commissioners will be able to adequately scrutinize the governance and financial affairs of academies and free schools.  This role could be delegated to 
defaultlocal authorities.
defaultThe appropriateness of academy status for primary schools and what special factors apply; and what evidence there is that academy status can bring value for money either for individual primary schools or for the system as a whole
default28 
defaultPrim
defaultary schools have bee
defaultn reluctant to convert for 
defaultgood reasons.  They are too small to go-it-alone as they lack the resources of larger secondary schools to hire business managers and the like.  That means they are likely to be forced to join chains which 
defaultcould result in loss of freedom as described above.  Primary schools value the support that local authorities offer.  Small rural schools are threatened by academy conversion for two reasons: they are too small to operate as stand-alone operations and they
default could be seen as too expensive or unprofitable
default for take-over by an academy chain.
default29 There is increasing evidence that primary schools which are their own admission authori
defaultties
default,
default which 
defaultincludes academies, are changing their admission criteria to give prior
defaultity to pupils already attending attached nurseries.  The School’s Adjudicator has ruled this does not adhere to the Schools Admission Code and has upheld all complaints about primary schools behaving in this way.  However, a school could get away with such
default procedures unless someone complains.  There is a role for local authorities in ensuring the admission criteria for all schools in its area adhere to the Code.
default30 Academy status does not bring value for money.  £1b has already 
defaultbeen overspent on the 
defaultprogram
defaultme but academy status alone does not raise results.  Where schools have improved it is be
defaultcause of initiatives such as London Challenge or because schools
default demonstrate the qualities Ofsted identified as being present in good or outstanding schools.  These 
defaultqu
defaultalities 
defaultdid not include academy status.
default  When schools “compete”, as they are expected to do, money is likely to be diverted from educat
defaultion to marketing.  CHAT
default, for example, employs a m
defaultarketing manager (
defaulthttp://www.chat-edu.org.uk/press-enquiries
default )
default. 
default 
default32 There is also the problem outlined above: schools will be required to purchase services, resources or materials from their academy cha
defaultin which might
default not represent value-for-
defaultmoney and, in the worst cas
defaultes, are substandard.
defaultWhat alternatives to sponsored academy status should be offered to failing primary schools
default?
default33 It is not clear that all primary schools identified as “failing”
default are
default failing.   Results at Downhills were improving and had exceeded the ben
defaultchmark.
default34 That said, if primary schools are struggling then they should be given the option of remain
defaulting with their local authority
default especially where th
defaulte authority has
default been supporting the school.  Ofsted, before it changed its mind, said Downhills’ improve
defaultment was down to the head and local authority support.  
default35 This suggests that the imperative to get as many primary schools converted to academies is taking precedence over 
defaultother factors including parental wishes and council support.  
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default