AFS0039defaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault Natalie defaultPapanastasioudefault, PhD candidate, Social Policy, School of Social and Political Science, University of Edinburgh. Funded by the Economic and Social Research Council. defaultE-mail: defaultn.papanastasiou@sms.ed.ac.ukdefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default1.1 defaultThe evidence presented in this paper is based on research which involved conducting 30 interviews with local authority officers, 
defaultacademy 
defaultsponsors, 
defaultacademy 
defaultprincipals and chairs of governors. Interviews 
defaultexplored
default the local implementation of the academies policy in two local authority case study areas and were conducted between September 2012 and April 2013. 
defaultThe research focused on
default the
default implementation of the
default academies policy in secondary schools. The first case study is a Metropolitan authority in the North-West of England (hereafter referred to as NW-LA). The research 
defaultin NW-LA 
defaultfocused on interviewing principals and sponsors of academies which were set up under the New Labour government as well as local authority officers
default (current and retired)
default. The second case study is a shire county in the East of England (hereafter referred to as E-LA) which has amongst the highest number of secondary
default school
default converters in the country. Interviews conducted in E-LA focused on principals and chairs of governors of converter academies and 
defaultcurrent
default 
defaultlocal authority officers. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe research is part of a PhD project funded by the Economic and Social Research Council 
default[grant number ESI01943X/1].
default&#xa0;
default1.2default defaultThis submission focuses on 3 aspects highlighted by the inquiry.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default2.1 defaultInterviews with local authority officers, academy principals and academy chairs of governors in E-LA explored the reasoning behind schools’ decisions to convert. The three key reasons stated were: 
default(1) 
defaultfinancial incentives,
default (2)
default fear of isolation and lack of resources, and 
default(3) 
defaultreputational risk.
default&#xa0;default2.2 defaultFinancial incentive
default&#xa0;
default“
defaultas
default a governor it’s hard to argue with nearly £1 million going into your school’s infrastructure.” (Academy Chair of Governors)
default&#xa0;default2.3 defaultThe E-LA academies considered in the research converted between March 2011 and February 2012. They therefore received the Local Authority Central Spent Equivalent Grant (LACSEG) before it w
defaultas reformed in April 2013 (when 
defaultthe LACSEG
default was recalculated,
default 
defaultresulting
default in 
defaultthe reduction of many
default schools
default’ LACSEG funding
default). All interviewees (working in both the local authority and academies) cited the financial advantages of converting to academy status as being
default either
default the most decisive
default factor
default or amongst the most significant 
defaultconsiderations when
default choosing to convert.
default&#xa0;default2.4 defaultThis extra money is described as making the policy difficult to argue with and as putting schools in a position where they felt they could not afford 
defaultnot
default to become an academy. Indeed, the incentives are described in 
defaulta way which
default suggests schools felt they were almost left with 
defaultno choice
default about whether to become involved in the academies policy or not. This, importantly, clashes with the policy’s official narrative of giving greater agency and autonomy to individual schools – instead of feeling empowered to be given a choice over whether to implement a policy, 
defaultmany 
defaultlocal actors reflect that in practice they were unable to turn down the option of converting to an academy in light of the financial rewards this would bring to their school. In addition, this explanation 
defaultfor
default conversion is at odds with the 
defaultDfE
default clearly stating that 
defaultbecoming an academy should not bring about a financial advantage or disadvantage to a school.
default&#xa0;default2.5 defaultRisk of isolation / lack of resources
default&#xa0;
default“
defaultyou
default have to think about what will happen if we 
defaultdon’t
default do this [convert to an academy]. And we could become a very isolated school.” (Academy Principal)
default&#xa0;default2.6 defaultLocal authority 
defaultofficers
default, 
defaultacademy
default principals and 
defaultchairs of 
defaultgovernors revealed another factor that affected schools’ decision to convert to academy status was that they anticipated the majority of secondary school
defaults in the local authority area would
default convert. The fear and sense of risk associated with being in the minority of schools that were not an academy were significant. This concern was based on 
defaultthe 
defaultreasoning that if most schools in the local authority converted to academies the local authority itself would be left with limited resources, leading to a reduced ability to support the remaining schools for which it is 
defaultstill 
defaultaccountable.
default&#xa0;default2.7 defaultSimilar to the issue of financial incentives, this sense of risk relating to isolation and lack of resources was characterised by a sense that, while schools were officially given a choice over whether to convert to academy status or not, in actual fact they felt that they had very little choice due to anticipating a situation where they would be disadvantaged by not converting.
default&#xa0;default2.8 defaultReputational Risk
default&#xa0;
default“
defaultthere
default was a sense that good schools were becoming academies. 
defaultErm
default, it was sort of out there in the ether. And therefore you can’t help but feel, ‘
defaultwe’re
default a good school, we ought to become one too’ […]” (Academy Principal)
default&#xa0;
default2.9default 
defaultAnother perceived risk associated with not embracing the academies policy was related to the reputation of schools. This factor was emphasised less compared to other considerations
default.
default 
defaultH
defaultowever
default,
default schools accepted that converter academies come with a reputation of being higher-achieving
default schools
default and therefore felt that their own reputations could be at risk if they did not take on the academy label. Again, interviewees 
defaultplaced emphasis on
default what could happen if their school did 
defaultnot
default convert to academy status rather than discussing any anticipated changes related to the choice of converting.
default&#xa0;default2.10 defaultSummary
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultT
defaulthe case study of converter academies in E-LA reveals how schools’ choice to convert was largely based on a sense that financial gains were too 
defaultsubstantial
default to turn down and the 
defaultperceived 
defaultrisks of 
defaultnot
default converting were too great. These justifications for converting sharply contrast with the official narrative of the academies policy 
defaultwhich states that
default converters will choose to convert exclusively on the grounds that they will be able to enjoy greater freedoms.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default3.1 
defaultThe research 
defaultalso 
defaultfocused on the nature of the role played by sponsors in academies
default.
default 
defaultA key point to emerge
default was that in this particular case sponsors needed to be understood in terms of the position they occupy in the local area.
default 
defaultFirstly, all interviewees described their decision to become sponsors as being inextricably linked to the role their organisation plays in the local area. Secondly, the involvement of the NW-LA City Counci
defaultl as a co-sponsor was crucial in
default convincing sponsors to become involved with the academies programme. Finally, sponsors demonstrated that their activities often reflected the policy priorities of the NW-LA City Council. I have analysed these issues and 
defaultexamined 
defaulthow NW-LA sponsors govern academies in greater detail elsewhere (see 
defaultPapanastasiou
default (2013)
default;
default reference below).
default&#xa0;
default3.2 
defaultAnother way in which the local 
defaultnature
default of NW-LA sponsors is 
defaultdemonstrated
default relates to their collaboration with principals during the planning stages of the academies. While the NW-LA academies were being set up
default,
default sponsors and principals worked 
defaulttogether 
defaulton understanding the specific nature of the area which was going to be served by the academy. Creating a strategy for engaging with the local community was described by 
defaultboth 
defaultsponsors and principals as requiring careful consideration of issues such as
default demography, local history and
default 
defaultspecific relationships
default of trust which would all affect how the academy would be 
defaultregarded by the community
default. For example, 
defaultby
default engaging with parents in the local area one academy subsequently altered the structure of school terms and holidays to reflect the opinion that a long summer holiday was seen as burdensome for parents who could usually not afford to pay for child care, take holidays or enrol
default their
default children in activities. 
default&#xa0;
default3.3 
defaultNW-LA academy sponsorship has also been set up in collaboration with local partners which has meant that influential local
default individuals
default 
defaultare on
default these academies’ boards of governors. 
defaultAcademy principals describe how this equips them with important knowledge about the area in which the academy is located and the communities it serves. For example, one principal emphasised the value of having an executive of the local housing association on the academy board of governors as a way of gaining insights into housing issues that would be affecting students.
default Principals and sponsors also emphasised how having local authority officers on their board of governors provided valuable contextual knowledge about the wider social issues – such as the nature of drug problems, transport links and child poverty figures – which are likely to be affecting many academy pupils. Thus, the way in which sponsors 
defaultare personally invested
default in the local area and the partnerships
default they have
default with other local individuals and institutions has been described as equipping NW-LA academies with the resources to deliver an education strategy that is sensitive to locally-specific needs. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4 
defaultSummary
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultT
defaulthe academy sponsors included in the NW-LA case study operate and collaborate in a manner that cannot be disconnected from the locality in which they work. This reveals how
default, in order to understand
default the role of academy sponsors
default, it
default may 
defaultbe necessary to
default relat
defaulte
default them to their particular local context. However, 
defaultthese 
defaultconsider
defaultations relating to 
defaultthe local context 
defaultare less
default likely 
defaultto be
default important in the case of other types of academy sponsor, particularly chain sponsors who can operate across a number of geographical areas. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4.1 
defaultWhile issues around academy chains are not the central focus of the research, almost all policy actors in both case study areas mentioned chains when being interviewed about the implementation of academies. With the exception of one principal who discussed the advantages of economies of scale which exist in chains, all other comments relating to the activities of chains expressed concern. 
default&#xa0;
default4.2 
defaultConcerns over geographical spread
default&#xa0;
defaultA major concern about chains related to those which govern academies over a large geographical area. There was an objection to the idea of running multiple schools with a single model or ethos, largely due to the perception that this did not allow for enough emphasis on local educational needs or for a ‘local solution’ to be brokered 
defaultwith
defaultin a school. Running an academy using a generic model was framed in a negative light by interviewees as it is perceived to remove local insights from a child’s educational experience. ‘
defaultO
defaultne size fits all’ chain sponsor
defaultship
default was also seen as being ‘imposed’ on schools and th
defaulterefore
default 
defaultleading to the removal of
default their individual freedoms. One 
defaultex-
defaultlocal authority officer described being asked for help by a London-based academy chain which had just acquired a sch
defaultool in the north of England. This ex-local authority officer argued that the chain lacked 
defaultlocal
default knowledge which resulted in it struggling with how to go about supporting the school. 
defaultThus, there is a perceived contradiction between localism and the spread of national academy chains. 
default&#xa0;
default4.3 
defaultConcerns over accountability
default&#xa0;
defaultThere was also a widespread concern amongst interviewees regarding 
defaulta lack of information about
default 
defaulthow and why executives are motivated to run academy chains. The perceived link between 
defaultthe salaries of 
defaultsome executives and the number of academies in their chains was unanimously considered unacceptable because it was 
defaultthought
default to be emphasising chain growth over the delivery of educational quality. An associated concern is that chains and their executives are accountable to their company rather than the local community served by an individual academy. It was generally 
defaultconsidered
default that sponsors from the local area and the local authority its
defaultelf have a commitment to
default local communities which was not understood to be the case with chain sponsors. 
default&#xa0;
default4.4 
defaultConcerns over governance
default&#xa0;
defaultAcademy principals and chairs of governors argued that they would prefer not to be sponsored by a chain due to
default the nature of their
default governance structures. One interviewee discussed how some chains have started to take powers out of an academy’s board of governors and lift these to a ‘higher level’ which they saw as problematic due to decision-making becoming detached from the immediate school context. This governance structure was also linked back to concerns over decisions not being representative of local community interests
default. A
default board of governors consisting of local representatives such as parents and community members
default was suggested to be more representative of a local community
default. One principal also objected to the idea of being part of an academy chain by arguing that there would be less autonomy for principals due to the central 
defaultmanagement of academy functions 
defaultwhich would 
defaultnormally 
defaultbe 
defaultcarried out at the school level. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4.5 
defaultSummary
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultCentral to these concerns regarding academy chains is the perception that they 
defaultdisconnect schools 
defaultfrom
default an
default education
default that is locally sensitive
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
defaultReferencedefaultPapanastasiou
default, N. 2013. ‘Commercial Actors and the Governing of Education: the case of academy school sponsors in England.’ 
defaultEuropean Educational Research Journal
default 12(4): 447-462.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default