&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Christopher Howell
default (CYS0101)
default&#xa0;
defaultI think that the Committee needs to start from the position that cycling is a public good, and should be encouraged and protected, and that cyclists have a right to be on the road. This might not be immediately 
defaultobvious to those who feel that their lives are plagued by inconsiderate pavement cyclists or who feel that they regularly see rule-breaking by cyclists as they sit in traffic.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe health benefitsdefault of cycling are well documented (see 
defaultScand
default J Med 
defaultSci
default Sports.
default 2011 Aug
default;21
default(4):496-509. for a recent systematic review). For the benefit of public health, people need to be encouraged to become
default cyclists, not discouraged by tales of how dangerous it is or made to feel anxious about joining an ‘out-group’ that it is becoming increasingly acceptable to denigrate (if someone took up regular swimming for health reasons, they wouldn’t expect regular c
defaultontrbutions to swimming/ fitness blogs in newspapers to attract huge numbers of below-the-line comment scoffing at how ridiculous slightly overweight middle-aged women look in lycra swimsuits, never mind celebrities tweeting about how fun it is to duck the
defaultm in the deep-end or run them off the road).
default&#xa0;
defaultCongestion: defaultanyone who feels annoyed that they are being ‘held up’ on urban roads by cyclists should bear in mind that the likely alternative isn’t that the cyclist doesn’t make the journey at all, but that the
defaulty make it by alternate means, and that this could very well mean by car. There are numerous reasons why we should be encouraging people out of cars (oil scarcity and energy security, air pollution, the dangers of sedentary lifestyles), but the most obvious
default one for ‘mondeo man’ sitting in a traffic jam fuming at the fact that a cyclist has just 
defaultpassed
default him on the way to the Advanced Stop Zone is that the traffic jam would be even bigger if every cyclist progressing through it were in a car instead.
default&#xa0;
defaultI am con
defaultcerned by two strands common in recent media stories regarding cycling. First is the recent much-publicised spate of accidents in London in which the common thread seems to be large vehicles (either Coaches or HGVs) catching cyclists while making 
defaultturns.
default Re
defaultgardless of the individual circumstances of these incidents (which I do not think have yet been made public) and whether they relate primarily to cyclists passing on the left of such vehicles or to vehicles passing cyclists and then turning, there is clear
defaultly an issue regarding the blind-spots of large vehicles in crowded areas. Inexperienced cyclists may be unaware of the danger of filtering left beside an HGV (it is worth noting that the vast majority of cycle lanes run on the left hand side of the road, a
defaultnd so road layouts actively encourage cyclists approaching junctions, and ASZs in particular, to do so in this way), and greater awareness of this by road planners and cyclists is required. It is not clear to me, however, why in an age when CCTV systems ar
defaulte relatively cheap and convex mirrors are available why it should be acceptable for large vehicles to have blind spots at all. Apparently 
defaultlorries
default that travel to Europe often have CCTV systems fitted to avoid the fines levied on those who are found to have 
defaultstowaways on board; I can see no reason beyond lack of political will for HGVs in urban areas not to have 360-degree visibility. No doubt a robust system for HGVs and PSVs would cost more than the sub-£100 options available via Amazon for private cars, but
default it seems unlikely that they would cost more than the cost of a full tank of fuel.
default&#xa0;
defaultSecondly is the apparent response to the cry of ‘something must be done’ by police forces in targeting cyclists for minor and often technical infractions, apparently driven
default by a quota system rather than by the danger 
defaultposed.
default You will no doubt be aware of the recent case of Alex Paxton, who refused to accept a fixed-penalty notice served on him by a police officer 
defaultafter he stopped just beyond the Advance Stop Line at a junctio
defaultn because the ASZ that was there to enable him to stop safely ahead of other traffic was blocked by a car; the CPS recently decided to drop the case. I am also concerned that a number of Police Forces seem to be adopting a zero-tolerance approach to cyclis
defaultts on pavements (
defaulthttp://road.cc/content/news/86534-spalding-police-crack-down-pavement-cycling-5am
default), apparently ignoring the written advice of Mr Paul Boateng
default when he was Home Office Minister in 1999 and repeated by John Crozier in 2004 to the effect that it was not the intention of the law that FPNs be used indiscriminately against cyclists cycling in a responsible manner on pavements, for fear of traffic. I w
defaultould add to this that shared-use paths often have short sections where they are discontinuous that would technically require cyclists to dismount. Often these are virtually identical to the existing shared-use path, and I have generally taken the view that
default cycling slowly and carefully on these is preferable to getting off my bike and becoming a wider obstacle on the path. I suspect that a lot of these are effectively administrative or planning errors in not continuing the shared use path to its logical dest
defaultination. The continued presence of cycling PCSOs on pavements in my area suggest that a crack-down is not imminent locally, but I would be extremely frustrated if such an operation in my area necessitated a long and dangerous detour on my journey to work. 
defaultI appreciate that Police Forces now have a duty to respond to concerns raised by the populations that they serve, but this should not be used to gang on cyclists because people dislike us. The danger and injury caused by cyclists in all situations, includi
defaultng on the pavement, is orders of magnitude less than that caused by cars; people are not going to be encouraged to cycle if they fear that the police are going to fine them on the slightest pretext to meet a quota.
default&#xa0;
defaultOn road design, urban planners should t
defaultake account of the needs of cyclists when designing road layouts. Of particular concern to me are ‘traffic calming’ measures that narrow the road with traffic islands or pavement widenings. In practice these encourage motorists to try to squeeze past cycli
defaultsts and then swerve back in when they realise they risk hitting the road furniture, and thus make the roads less rather than more safe. A retired friend was recently hit and killed near one of these; the motorist involved claimed that my friend fell sudden
defaultly into his path, and while at his age a sudden stroke is not impossible it seems more likely to me that the motorist misjudged the road narrowing and instinctively avoided the concrete bollard rather than the cyclist. You may be aware of a campaign for fu
defaultlly-segregated cycling infrastructure. While this would in theory be very welcome, I am concerned that segregation would erode the rights of cyclists to use the road network, and increase perception that cyclists shouldn’t be on the road in the way of cars
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default