&#xa0;
default1. 
defaultOur Community, Our Schools 
default(OCOS) 
defaultis a community-based organization bringing together parents, teachers and other local 
defaultresidents of the borough of Waltham Forest.
default 
defaultWe campaign to promote the work of our local community schools and we are opposed to the establishment of ‘Free Schools’ in the borough.
default2. 
defaultOur evidence relates to the process used to establish Free Schools and 
defaulthighlights what we view as serious democratic deficits in this process. 
default 
defaultOur experience leads us to believe that the problems with the process used to establish Free Schools makes them deeply divisive of our communities. 
defaultLegislative framework for Free Schdefaultoolsdefault3. 
defaultThe legislation which establishes the process for establishing a Free School is contained in Sections 9 and 10 of the Academies Act 201
default0
default.
default 
defaultSection 10 of the Academies Act
default says
default:
default(1) Before entering into Academy arrangements with the Secretary of Stat
defaulte in relation to an additional school, a person (i.e. the person opening the school) must consult such persons as the person thinks appropriate. 
default(
default2) The consultation must be on the question of whether the arrangements should be entered into.” Section 9 of
default the Academies Act says that “The Secretary of State must take into account what the impact of establishing the additional school would be likely to be on maintained schools, Academies and institutions within the further education sector in the area in whi
defaultch the additional school is (or is proposed to be) situated.”
defaultMeaningful consultation:default4. 
defaultThe QC David Wolfe has helpfully summarised what a consultation must do to be lawful a follows:
default“In short, anyone who undertakes consultation must let people know wha
defaultt they are proposing and why, give them a chance to comment, and conscientiously take into account their responses with an open mind before deciding whether or not to do what was proposed. The basic rule is that, whether or not a public body was required t
defaulto consult, if it does so, then it must comply with the following overarching obligations (unless detailed 
defaultstatutory rules supplant these)
default: 
default5. In our view, o
defaultur experience shows that the effect of th
defaulte legislation introduced in 2010 is to allow groups setting up Free Schools to conduct performative consultati
defaultons that make a mockery of the substantive requirements of meaningful consultation. We believe that the legislation allows and encourages organisations to:
defaultWe believe that this legislative framework encourages very poor democratic practice which prejudices the outcomes of consultations and which makes a mockery of the principles of consultation and
default 
defaultwhich are causing anger and division within our community.
defaultCdefaultonsultation ahead of pre-approval:default6. We believe that the s
defaultystem whereby the Department of Education ‘preapproves’ proposals for new ‘additional’ or Free Schools
default ahead of a statutory consultation
default is perverse, undemocratic and open to abuse. Under section 9 of the Academies Act, the Secretary of State must take account of the impact of the school on the community, yet the decision to preapprove a school is taken before the proposers of the Free Sch
defaultools undertake their statutory consultation. It is entirely unclear how the Secretary of State is able to undertake an impact assessment in the absence of any consultation evidence from the proposers of the School. 
default7. 
defaultHaving accidentally discovered the ex
defaultistence of two proposals to open Free Schools in Waltham Forest, O
defaultCOS
default supporters, frustrated at the lack of information being provided
default,
default made sustained attempts to find out what consultation in the community had taken place ahead of submission to the DfE.
default8
default. We were able to establish very few concrete details about the consultation process ahead of the DfE’s decision and our view is that th
defaulte entire process 
defaultof 
default‘consultation’ ahead of preapproval was characterized 
defaultby spin and an unwillingness to disclose detai
defaultls.
default 
defaultFor example, in a Newsletter from December 2012, Oasis referred to ‘liaising’ with local MP Stella Creasy
default,
default who 
defaultimmediately 
defaultcontested the claim on Twitter. In a Twitter exchange from 7 December, she claimed that a meeting with local parents had been gat
defaultecrashed by a representative of Oasis
default. It appears that this was then 
defaultspun 
defaultas
default 
default‘
defaultliaison
default’
default for the benefit of the community. 
default9. 
defaultSupporters of O
defaultCOS
default then submitted F
defaultOI
default requests seeking details of meetings that had been held in the community, attempts to talk to
default stakeholders and relationships with the Local Authority. We eventually received full answers 
defaultafter
default the Department of Education had approved four proposed Free Schools’ applications. 
defaultThe answers we received provided very little concrete detail and left us 
defaultwith the clear impression that consultations had been shaped to elicit the desired result with as little debate as possible. 
default10. In their first response, dated 22 May, Oasis talked about ‘an 18 week wide-scale public consultation’ prior to submitting thei
defaultr bid to the DfE and listed meetings and letters sent without dates or specifics. Similarly, Tauheedul referred to ‘actively working with members of the local community for over 18 months in the development of our application’ and ‘engaging in regular dial
defaultogue and consultation with a whole range of individual and community stakeholders, including the Local Authority and local residents’. No further details were given. When we followed up with Oasis with a second FOI request we were sent a letter on 11 July 
defaultcontaining a longer list of events and activities again with few specifics or dates. Notably, Oasis did not provide an answer to the question ‘Are you prepared to reconsider (amend or withdraw) your application in light of further consultation?’
default11. 
defaultThe 
defaultkey point we wish to draw the Committee’s attention to is that the process as constructed makes so fe
defaultw
default requirements on organisations that without the activity of O
defaultCOS
default supporters in questioning these organisations about their activity, the vast majority of 
defaultWaltham Forest residents, including large numbers of residents and parents directly affected by the establishment of these schools would have remained 
defaultentirely 
defaultignorant of the fact that any 
default‘
defaultconsultation
default’
default activity was taking place at all, prior to submitti
defaultng a bid to the DfE. We also have serious concerns about the nature of the consultations undertaken prior to submitting bids and would characterise them 
defaultrather 
defaultas campaigns geared toward gathering statements of support rather than consultations. Worryingly
default, these campaigns made use of incorrect and misleading information on key issues of great concern to local parents. 
defaultMisleading claims about shortfalls of places:default12. In a press release dated 6 November 2012, Oasis stated that Local Authority statistics sh
defaultowed that their school was necessary to make up a shortfall of places in the borough of Waltham Forest. “
defaultPlanning projections for secondary school places in the London Borough of Waltham Forest show year on year increase in dema
defaultnd until the end of the 2023
default/24, with a  shortfall of 250 secondary places by 2015.16.
default 
default13. Much of the case for their school appeared to rest on this shortfall and the claim that there was no alternative to the proposed Free School.
default14. However, what Oasis did not mention and have 
defaultnever acknowledged was that the Local Authority is actively engaged in planning the expansion of existing provision to meet this demand in a coordinated way. In March and July 2013, the Council published reports that mapped the projected demand up to 2023/
default24. This did show a year on year increase in the demand for secondary school places until 2023/24 but it also indicated a significant drop off in the demand for primary places from 2018/19 which would subsequently be expected to be expressed later in secon
defaultdary demand.
default 
defaultThe July report also set out plans for addressing this. In its report in July 2013, the Council identified a 
defaultshortfall in secondary places of 123
default 2015/6,  rather than the 250 indicated by Oasis, and they noted that this shortfall was being me
defaultt by the expansion of existing high quality schools and noted that the opening of two new secondary Free Schools, as proposed by Oasis and Tauheedul would produce ‘a significant surplus of places at least until 2017’. It also expressed concern at the poten
defaulttial impact on quality and equality of the two proposed Free Schools.
default In our FOI request in May 2013, we asked Oasis what evidence they had provided to people they approached to sign up for their proposal regarding current or future place shortfalls in Wa
defaultltham Forest. Their reply was that they were ‘not required to provide evidence regarding current and/or future place shortfall in Waltham Forest. We believe that the parents we were engaging with were familiar with the local school place planning informati
defaulton and referred any questions to the local authority and other publicly available information’.
default15. However, it has come to our attention that Oasis are still actively using unreferenced figures with no known provenance that seem to bear no relation to the
default Local Authority’s own work. On the website for their school, the claim that 
default"There is an estimated shortfall of over 700 secondary places in the borough by 2014-2015 and our aim is to create a school which will meet this need."
default 
default16. In their press statem
defaultents and their leaflets Oasis made reference to Local Authority statistics and ‘estimates’ of a shortfall in a way that we believe has been potentially misleading to local parents. In fact, the only people pointing local parents and residents to the Local 
defaultAuthority’s figures were OCOS activists through our website and email list. 
default18. The Local Authority themselves appeared to be unhappy with the way in which the issue of demand for places had been used by the proposers of the Free Schools. The Local Author
defaultity wrote on November 12, 2013 that “it has been our experience that, in the absence of clear information from the Council, misconceptions regarding the need for places and the quality of existing provision can flourish. Such misconceptions then lead to in
defaultappropriate proposals such as those that recently been preapproved.” 
defaultPreapproval, spin and prejudice:default19. 
defaultThe preapproval process allows the proposers of Free Schools to make statements which prejudice any consultation process.
default 
defaultIn May 2013, supporters of
default O
defaultCOS
default submitted F
defaultOI
default requests to the proposers of three Free Schools in Waltham Forest. We sought details of what consultation had taken place and what the plans were to consult in the community. The replies we received did not provide details of consultati
defaulton but made it clear that the proposers were awaiting the preapproval of the Department. 
default 
defaultOasis Community Learning wrote: “I am writing to advise you that a full response will be made after we have heard whether our application for the proposed new school 
defaulthas been approved by the Department for Education.” 
default 
defaultTauheedul Free Schools wrote: “Should we receive initial approval from the DfE, the current plans are to engage in a comprehensive consultation between June and July 2013. The detailed plans will be on o
defaultur website”. Notably, detailed plans were not on their website at the time the consultation was launched. To the best of our knowledge they were never on the main Tauheedul website. 
default20. 
defaultIn the immediate wake of the Department’s approval in June 2013, 
defaultOasi
defaults 
defaultissued 
defaulta 
defaultpress 
defaultstatement
default proclaiming that there would be 
defaulta new 
defaultschool in Walthamstow.  Oasis’s press release quoted one of the parent sponsors saying: “We are delighted that our long-held dreams of opening a new community secondary school in the heart of
default this community have finally been realised”.
default 
defaultOasis have, at the time of writing, still not conducted their statutory consultation but it is clear that many people in Walthamstow believe that it is a done deal on the basis of the Department’s ‘preapproval’.
default21. 
defaultAs we wrote at the time of the preapproval decision: 
default‘
defaultIf full details of the two applications are not made public until after the DfE gives approval, in what meaningful sense can the DfE decision be said to take account of informed local concerns? How
default can the DfE show that it is aware of any concerns raised by the community in deciding whethe
defaultr to approve the school or not?’ 
defaultStatutory consultation:default22. Only Tauheedul Free Schools have currently completed their statutory consultation. This process was a
defaultlso deeply flawed. For example, in an email dated 12 May 2013, Fiona McGrath, a Tauheedul representative, wrote to us to assure us that “w
defaulte are aware of our obligations regarding statutory consultation. Should we receive initial approval from the DfE, the current plans are to engage in a comprehensive consultation between June and July 2013. The detailed plans will be on our website 
defaultwww.tauheedulschools.com
default.
default” In fact, neither the detailed plans or the consultation ever appeared on the main website and at the time of writing,  December 2013, no reference to the Walthamstow Free School can be foun
defaultd anywhere on their site. Instead, it came to our attention by accident that they had launched a six week consultation on a separate website in June 2013. Tauheedul claimed that the consultation was distributed to ‘local networks’, a public meeting held on
default 24 June, and local media. In their consultation response they claimed that ‘In order to increase reach, an advertisement was placed in the Yellow Advertiser – a local newspaper circulated to every household in Walthamstow, Leyton, Chingford, Ilford, Wanst
defaultead, Woodford, Barking and Dagenham’.
default In fact, there are almost 97,000 households in the borough and the total circulation of the Yellow Advertiser is 15,000. Its ‘reach’ in Walthamstow is just 17% and 11% in neighbouring Leyton and Leytonstone.
default Needless
default to say, this is not even close to ‘every household’. Yet the local networks and the ad in the Yellow Advertiser were the only ways of finding out about the consultation meeting held on 24 June. 
default23. Under pressure from ourselves and following a request f
defaultrom one of the local MPs Tauheedul extended the period of their consultation and received significant opposition, which they have acknowledged. However, since they are required to consult only on the question of whether they should set up a Free School and
default whether they should enter a funding agreement with the DfE, in their response to the consultation, published in November 2013, there is no obligation on them to reflect on any other objections or opposition raised. 
default24. At the time of writing, Oasis have 
defaultnot launched their consultation (to our knowledge) but they have advertised in the TES for a principal, stating that the school will be opening.
default This invites the obvious question of whether any consultation they launch on the question of whether they shou
defaultld open a Free School can possibly be conducted in good faith. 
defaultFailure to consider Equality Impact of proposed Free Schoolsdefault25. In addition to the requirements to consult set out in the Academies Act 2010 (see paragraph 3 above), the Department for Educat
defaultion is also bound by Section 149 of the Equality Act 2010 (the Public Sector Equality Duty) to 
defaulta) 
defaultEliminate discrimination, harassment
default 
defaultand victimisation and any other conduct
default 
defaultthat is 
defaultprohibited by or under the Act.
defaultb) 
defaultAdvance equality of opportunity
default 
defaultbetwe
defaulten people who share a relevant
default 
defaultprotected characteristic and people who
default 
defaultdo not share it.
defaultc) 
defaultFoster good relations between people who
default 
defaultshare a relevant protected characteristic
default 
defaultand those who do not share it.
default26. In order to meet the duty, the DfE must show du
defaulte regard to these three aims during the decision making process. To date, no assessment of the equality impact of the proposed new free schools has been published. Given that three of the four proposed schools are faith based and one is single-sex, there a
defaultre clearly questions about how these schools advance equality of opportunity and how they foster good relations. Many local residents have expressed concern about the impact of faith based schools on community cohesion and the impact of another single sex 
defaultschool on existing co-educational schools where there is already a gender imbalance.
defaultConclusiondefault 25. In summary, the legislation as it currently stands, coupled with the stance taken by the DfE, enables and encourages organisations to design and conduct co
defaultnsultations that cannot possibly fulfill the criteria set out by David Wolfe QC and therefore cannot be considered to be meaningful. Campaigns to win support among targeted populations are dressed up as consultations ahead of submissions to the DfE. The De
defaultpartment appears to take a decision to pre-approve the proposals on the basis of the evidence garnered by these campaigns alone and without any attempt to conduct genuine assessments of their likely equality or wider community impact. This preapproval is t
defaulthen used by sponsor organisations to effectively prejudice the statutory consultation, a consultation which is itself deeply flawed in being targeted and shaped around constituencies determined by the sponsors, on a timescale that suits them and on such a 
defaultnarrow question that there is virtually no possibility of conscientiously reflecting on or amending the proposals.
default26. In our view, this is a travesty of basic democratic process. In our experience, this is one of the major reasons why our campaign has gar
defaultnered such widespread support. Many people oppose the two proposed secondary Free Schools for many different reasons, but many people who hold no strong opinions on the form of a school are nonetheless incensed by the gap between the rhetoric of choice ema
defaultnating from the Department for Education and the anti-democratic practices associated with the establishment of Free Schools.  
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://ourcommunityourschools.blogspot.co.uk/
default 
default 
defaulthttp://davidwolfe.org.uk/wordpress/archives/268
default  
default 
defaulthttp://twitdoc.com/view.asp?id=73594&amp;sid=1KSA&amp;ext=PDF&amp;lcl=PRESS-RELEASE-NO
defaultVEMBER-2012-Oasis-WSSI-FINAL.pdf&amp;usr=OasisSchoolE17&amp;doc=112312567&amp;key=key-183crdahd8t8wd9cktw3
default 
defaulthttp://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/documen
defaultts/s24331/Scrutiny%20Standard%20Report%20Revised.pdf
default 
defaulthttp://democracy.walthamforest.gov.uk/documents/s33836/Scrutin
defaulty%20Report%20-%20Secondary%20School%20expansions%20FINAL.pdf
default 
defaulthttp://www.oasisacademywalthamstow.org/content/vision-2
default 
defaultLondon Borough of Waltham Forest report ‘Free Schools and Ne
defaultw Schools Strategy’, Cabinet, 12 November 2013, p. 4
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultTauheedul Free Schools: Waltham Forest Leadership Academy for Girls: Public Consultation report, September 2013, p. 7 
defaulthttp://www.walthamforestlag.co.uk/pdfs/Waltham-Consultation-Final.pdf
default 
default 
defaulthttp://www.nsdatabase.co.uk/newspaperdetail.cfm?paperid=9272
default 
defaulthttp://www.tes.co.uk/Upload/Attachments/TES/035BC50004/Oasis%20Walthamstow%20Brochure.pdf
default&#xa0;
default