&#xa0;
defaultAFS0047default&#xa0;defaultSubmission to the Education Select Committee fromdefaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault ‘defaultHands Off Our Schoolsdefault’default&#xa0;
defaultINTRODUCTION
default&#xa0;
default1. 
default‘
defaultHands Off Our Schools
default’
default is a campaign group comprising local parents, teachers
default, governors and councilors, which
default monitor
defaults
default local schools and campaign
defaults
default against 
defaultacademisation and free schools in the Nottingham and Nottinghamshire area.
default It is not affiliated to any political party.
default  The group is clear in its aims
default:
default we oppose 
defaulta
defaultcademy
default conversions
default and 
defaultf
defaultree 
defaults
defaultchools because we see this 
defaultdevelopment 
defaultas a loss of 
defaultcommunity
default 
defaultc
defaultontrol of our local schools, combined with a
defaultn
default incoherent and chaotic approach to 
defaultthe provision of 
defaultschool place
defaults
default. Our view is that within such a system
default, 
defaultdemocratic control will diminish whilst 
defaulteducational inequalities are likely to increase.
default&#xa0;
defaultSUMMARY
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultIn our experience, detailed in this submission, we are already seeing our concerns being 
defaultrealis
defaulted.  However, of equal concern,
default is 
defaultthat the process
defaultes
default by which 
defaulta
defaultcadem
defaulties
default and 
defaultf
defaultree 
defaults
defaultchools are emerging are far from clear.  The
defaultr
defaulte are key questions about the 
defaultcommunity use of public money and yet we have consistently experienced attempt
defaults
default to 
defaultstifle 
defaultor avoid 
defaultpublic 
defaultdebate 
defaulton these key issues
default by those pursuing particular agendas. This is sometimes achieved by refusing to engage in meaningful consultation, but in o
defaultther instances it is achieved through acts of bullying and intimidation
default, of employees and ourselves
default.
default&#xa0;
default3. 
defaultOur concerns therefore
default centre on several issues
default and can be summarized as follows
default: 
default&#xa0;
defaulti.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultloss of democratic oversight of schools
default (including school place pla
defaultnning)
default; 
defaultii.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultlack of democratic procedures in the process of academisation and the setting up of free schools; 
defaultiii.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultgrowing
default 'conflicts of interest' emerging in the academy/free school 'world'
default (and associated opacity in relation to these)
default; 
defaultiv.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultthe 
defaultincreasingly ineffic
defaultient use
default of resources for 
defaultitems
default that are not 
defaultdirectly related 
defaultto education
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSUBMISSION
default&#xa0;
default4. 
defaultThis submission
default 
defaultgive
defaults
default case study examples from our area of 
defaultall 
defaultthese issues
default [within the submission we have anonymised all schools 
default–
default the 
defaultfull list of schools 
defaultmentioned, with brief descriptors, is provided at the end of this submission]
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default5. 
defaultWe have been struck by the way those who are 'for' academy status are unprepared to engage in debate with those of us who oppose. In our experience, those 'pushing' for aca
defaultdemy status are often the head and chair of governors of a school. Typically, they will arrange for the governing body to be addressed by another proponent of academies who gives all the arguments 'for' whilst no-one is invited to put the case 'against'
default 
default(
defaultw
defaulthere we have been invited we have been 
defaultwell-received.) 
defaultSometimes the academy proponent is portrayed as a ‘neutral’ who is giving 
default‘the facts’ in an unbiased way. 
default'Consultation' with parents usually follows the same pattern and staff are 
defaultoften
default simply informed. The impression is given that the change is going to happen, 
defaultit is non-controversial and 
defaultthat 
defaulteveryone agrees it's self evidently a 'good thing'. 
defaultWe are aware of many instances where staff feel afraid to express opinions that might oppose 
defaulta potential academisation
default.
default&#xa0;
default6. 
defaultIn our area,
default F
default Primary was going through the process
default of academisation, to become par
defaultt
default of the G Trust
default. The staff of another local primary
default, B
default, who were also facing academisation 
defaultas part of the G Trust 
defaultand who were anxious about
default it, arranged 
defaulta meeting for all 
defaultstaff 
defaultfrom local schools 
defaultto d
defaultiscuss it. No-one from F
default 
defaultattended and
default we have 
defaultbeen informed by a reliable source
default that letters 
defaultabout the meeting that were 
defaultind
defaultividually addressed to 
defaultSchool 
defaultF
default teachers were, on the orders of the he
defaultad teacher, 
defaultintercepted and 
defaultdestroyed.
default&#xa0;
default7. 
defaultAt A
default P
defaultrimary school, the upcoming academisation was 
defaultpublicly 
defaultannounced on the website of the
default 'parent' school (G
default, of which, more later) whilst the so-called 'consultation' period was still ongoing.
default&#xa0;
default8. 
defaultThe G
default Trust is a developing organisation in our area
default, centred on the G 
defaultsecondary 
defaultschool. It is gathering to it a number of local primary schools, those that might be considered in its local 'family'
default, though not all
default. In those schools, the arguments 'for' include
default the benefit of c
defaultlose working with G
default. This is an arg
defaultument being put at B
default Junior School but whilst that debate has 
defaultcontinued
default (the staff are active in opposition) it is clear the school has continued to 
defaultwork closely with G
default,
default so academisation would appear to b
defaulte un
defaultnecessary. C Primary Academy
default was an early 
default‘
defaultconverter 
defaultacademy’ 
defaultas part of the G
default Trust and the head has been active in promoting academy status to others. He acted as a kind of '
defaultsuper head'/adviser to E Primary. 
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultTh
defaulte Chair of Governors at A
default Primary i
defaults a former V
defaultice Principal at G
default, 
defaultwho now runs a consultancy which 
defaulthas done work for G
default. The senior
default office manager at 
defaultC
default is Chai
defaultr of Governors at 
defaultG
default. 
defaultThe wife of the B 
defaultChair of Governors 
defaultis a former deputy at the 
defaultsame 
defaultschool, later a local headteacher herself a
defaultnd then independent adviser to Nottinghamshire CC. She now runs her own ed
defaultucation consultancy and has done
default some training at G. Recently she was 
defaultco-opted o
defaultnto the governors at H and became Chair of the Finance Committee
default straight away
default, at the instigation of the headteacher. No suggestion is made that
default anyone has broken any laws but it concerns us that 
defaultan ‘inner circle’ of networked individuals is emerging in which a relatively 
defaultsmall number of people who clearly know each other well are 
defaultmaking significant and critical decisions 
defaultabout
default the future of schools 
defaultin our area.  There is no meaningful community involvement in these decisions and there is no democratic process whereby the local community has a meaningful voice in 
defaultthe 
defaultdecisions
default being
default made
default.  
default&#xa0;
default10. 
defaultA final 
defaultdecision has 
defaultnot 
defaulty
defaultet been made over academisation at B 
defaultin part, we think, because of the active opposition of many staff there, supported and encouraged by us. However, another 
defaultexplanation is that the governors are 
defaultwaiting for the loc
defaultal authority to foot the bill for a much needed new roof, before then taking the school out of local authority control.  If this is the case, it illustrates how key decisions about local management of our community schools are being driven by concerns that
default have nothing to do with educational arguments, or debates about community control 
default–
default but 
defaulteverything to do with principles of accountancy. We do not 
defaultbelieve
default 
defaultthis is in the interests of the effective stewardship of public finances, let alone the best interes
defaultts of our children.  
default Something similar a
defaultppears to be happening at H
default, a large primary school, where expansion is likely to 
defaulthappen
default with funding from the LA. However, meetings of governors have taken place with the head autocratically driving the a
defaultgenda. 
defaultThis is illustrated by t
defaulthe head
defaultteacher
default of C
default 
defaultbeing 
defaultinvited
default to a governors’ meeting
default to present the ‘academy’ case
default (no-one was invited to put the case ‘against’) 
default: governors were told they could only ask questions if these had been submitted in advance. 
defaultWe be
defaultlieve this is extraordinary.  How can governors have an intelligent and open debate about a critical issue if they are not able to respond to points raised in the presentation
default at the meeting
default?
default It exemplifies very clearly how important debates are 
defaultoften 
defaultone-
defaultsided
default, stage managed and closed down.  In 
defaultthis same school (H)
default 
defaultw
defaulte
default have been
default reliably informed that the staff governors are not elected but appointed by the head
defaultteacher
default, in rotation, fo
defaultr 'staff development' purposes! 
default&#xa0;
default11. 
defaultIn recent months, much of our effo
defaultrts have been put into opposing two proposed free schools 
default(L and M) 
defaultin our area. The DfE approved one of these, the 
defaultM Free School
default: b
defaultoth of the schools were mooted
default by J K 
defaultTrust 
defaultwhich is, effectively, J Comprehensive and the K
default School, a failing school w
defaulthich 
defaultthe 'outstanding' J
default has been supporting
default (NB an OFSTED judg
defaultment made in December 2011)
default. 
defaultT
defaulthere is no shortage of secondary places in the Sherwood area of Nottingham where the M Free School will, apparently, be located. 
default We believe that the introduction of a 
defaultf
defaultree 
defaults
defaultchoo
defaultl
default into the area will badly de
defaults
defaulttabilise existing provision and will be both inefficient and a threat to quality.
default&#xa0;
default12. 
defaultWe have 
defaulttherefore 
defaultcontinued to oppose the 
defaultM Free School
default, aiming to influence 
defaultthe parents of 
defaultpotential recruits, through letters a
defaultnd statements to the local press and by handing out leaflets at primary schools and at open meetings publici
defaultsing the 
defaultF
defaultree 
defaultS
defaultchool. The J K 
defaultTrust has not engaged 
defaultwith us 
defaultvia the media but reacted very strongly to our leaflets, issuing a threatening letter, t
defaultaking issue with our statements - and 
defaultthe 
defaultquestions raised - in the leaflet. We are satisfied that none of their complaints are justified: for example, we made much of the fact that currently there 
defaultwas (and still 
defaultis
default)
default 
defaultno publicly announced site for the new school and that as it is a new school parents couldn't talk to existing parents and pupils or view an OFSTED report or check examination outcomes. These are self-evident facts, 
defaultyet J K Trust
default seemed to think that becau
defaultse they could raise counter arguments, what we had said was a 'malicious falsehood'. Although we were conf
defaultident in what we had said, J K 
default's letter threatened legal action and as a small voluntary group with little in the way of funds, we couldn't afford le
defaultgal advice or representation and therefore we have had to stop issuing the
default leaflet. None of the
default 
defaultconsequential 
defaultactions 
defaultthreatened by J K 
defaulthave been pursued but we do feel as if we have been bullied into silence. We think this might in part be because we were
default instrumental in an article in the local press 
defaultthat
default revealed the sums earned
default 
defaultby the Chief Executive of J K  (the former headteacher of J
default) and other local 'executive principals' including at 
defaultG
default. As the Nottingham Post said, these are well in excess of 
defaultthe pu
defaultblished pay scales for headteachers in maintained schools and we believe they offer another example of how resources are being misdirected in the new school system
default.
default&#xa0;
default13. 
defaultThe development of academies has involved expenditure that we think would have been be
defaulttter spent directly on education. Several schools or ‘trusts’ have executive principals or CEOs in addition to headteachers, several of whom are paid ex
defaulttremely well (
defaultas reported in the Nottingham Post
default - 
defaulthttp://www.nottinghampost.com/Heads-Notts-academies-e
defaultarn-PM/story-19840343-detail/story.html
default); 
defaulta wide range of 
defaultposts are proliferating at academies as evidenced by the Jobs Section of the Not
defaulttingham Post
default.  These posts may perform important roles
default, however we question
default, for example,
default the educational value of a ‘
defaultPublicity Officer’ (
defaultrecently advertised by 
defaultJ K Trust) that
default appears to have more to do with marketing than teaching children in classrooms
default. Moreover
default we question whether the move away from local authority provision has resulted in the reduction of bureaucracy that was always claimed by advocates of academisation
default.
default Indeed, as multi-academy trusts
default in our area grow, many have established business premises 
defaultlocated away from schools.  This again suggests that the argument that academisation would direct resources away from town halls and into schools is proving 
defaultmisguided.
default 
default 
defaultRather we are seeing new bureaucracies being created, in one case located in 
defaulta 
defaultpremium 
defaultlocation in the 
defaultbusiness district
default of 
defaultNottingham. 
default&#xa0;
default14. 
defaultWe wonder also how much money the New Schools Network 
default(a publicly funded quango run by people close to Michael Gove) 
defaulth
defaultas put into supporting the J K
default free schools
default (L
default, 
defaultM
default and N
default)
default. 
defaultThe original two
default had website
defaults
default from early on, which featured children apparently wea
defaultring the L 
defaultFree School uniform; the same child models and people pretending to be teachers
default appeared
default on the ‘sister’ M Free School web site (the L 
defaultFS site has been taken down after the DfE f
defaultailed to support it
default and, in its place, at the same address, a website for the N Free School has appeared. 
defaultH
defaultow much public money 
defaulthas been
default wasted there?). In passing, we also question whether the adults and young people who appeared 
default– and still appear - 
defaultin t
defaulthe website pictures were paid models or member
defaults of staff/students at J
default or 
defaultK
default? If the latter, were proper permissions and procedures followed? Whatever the case, public money has been – and is being – spent to promote these schools, one of which at least wil
defaultl not come to pass.
default&#xa0;
defaultCONCLUSION
default14. 
defaultIn short, therefore, those who promote academies and free schools in our area do not engage in debate or proper consultation with those who might be considered legitimate stake-holders, preferring to further their cause 
defaultby more underhand means including, where they feel it necessary, threat and intimidation. They also appear to be engaged in an undemocratic behind-the-scenes 'network' of dubious conflicted interests, with clear financial benefits for some at the top.
default Fina
defaultlly, posing as both more effective and efficient than local authority schools, academies and free schools 
defaultactually 
defaultappear to waste public money
default - on
default additional management/admin posts or promotion - 
defaultthat could be 
defaultbetter spent on the education of children.
default A
defaults yet, we have seen little evidence locally that academies are more effective than their local authority predecessors and counterparts. 
default&#xa0;
default15. 
defaultIn conclusion, 
defaultwe very much welcome the Select Committee review, and the opportunity to present our arguments.  As we indicate, we are a relatively small group, and we are all volunteers.  We have no resources of an appreciable nature.  We are clear that we are opposed t
defaulto 
defaulta
defaultcademies and 
defaultf
defaultree 
defaults
defaultchools, for the reasons indicated.  However, our concerns are not just that our criticisms of 
defaulta
defaultcademies and 
defaultf
defaultree 
defaults
defaultchools 
defaultappear
default 
defaultto be 
defaultwell
default-
defaultfounded, 
defaultbut that genuine community debate on these issues is often being stifled.  As a group 
defaultof local people, we are well connected to parents, governors and those who work in schools.  We therefore hear what is happening in schools, and how decisions are being made. We know what is going on.  However, as a small group of local campaigners, with v
defaultery few resources, we are left with anecdot
defaultal
default rather than systematic evidence.  
defaultWe also understand that those who seek to stifle debate in the ways we have described have no interest in opening themselves up to serious research
default into
default their processes of gove
defaultrnance.
default&#xa0;
default16. 
defaultOur view is 
defaultthat 
defaultthere is an urgent need to commission serious, detailed and independent research into many of the issues identified in this submission.  There is much that is rotten in the governance of schools currently if our stories are re
defaultplicated on a much wider scale
default across the country
default.  Much more difficult and penetrating questions need to be posed, and 
defaultappropriate
default 
defaultresearch undertaken, if we are to develop a
default 
defaultmore authentic understanding of what is really happening in our schools.  We 
defaulthope that the Select Committee Review is the start of this process, and that much more work will be undertaken as a result.
default&#xa0;
defaultKey to Case Study schoolsdefault:
defaultA defaultPrimary Academy
default, recently ‘converted’; 
defaultB defaultJunior School, a school which has been considering and debat
defaulting becoming an academy for about a year
default;
defaultCdefault Primary Academy
default, an ‘early converter’;
defaultEdefault Primary
default, run by the local authority;
defaultF defaultPrimary School
default, a recent ‘converter’;
defaultGdefault Academy, a large secondary,  the
default ‘parent’ of a growing cluster of schools, run by the associated G Trust
default;
defaultH defaultPrimary, a large primary which has so far remained
default with the local authority;
defaultJ defaultComprehensive, an ‘outstanding’ academy
default;
defaultKdefault School, less successful secondary school, being supported 
defaultby J
default;
defaultJK defaultTrust: schools J and K have become an ‘academy trust’, led by the former headteacher of J
default and has recently added another school which was already an academy;
defaultLdefault Free School, a free school proposed by the JK Trust (turned down by DfE)
default;
defaultM defaultFree School
default, a free school, proposed by the JK Trust and approved by the DfE, due to open in September 2014
default;
defaultN defaultF
defaultree School
default, a free school proposed by the J K Trust to open on September 2014, close to the area in which the L Free School was proposed, whic
defaulth was 
defaultrejected by the DfE; the N
default Free School has been submitted for approval by the DfE but a decision has not yet been made. 
default&#xa0;
defaultColin Tucker, Chair, ‘Hands Off Our Schools’
default [colintucker18@gmail.com]
defaulthttp://nottsantiacademies.org
default18 
defaultDecember, 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default