&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultRCH0024defaultWritten evidence submitted by North London Strategy Alliance (NISA)default&#xa0;
defaultNote to Commons Education Committee Regarding Fostering Placements default&#xa0;defaultFurther to the points raised during the Committee Session on 27
defaultth
default November 2013 I thought it may be helpful further clarify for the Committee the position with regard to fostering placements.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe North London Strategic Alliance represents the London Boroughs of Camden, Enfield, Hackney, Haringey and Islington and during my evidence I mentioned that whilst these Boroughs make care placements outside their borough boundaries that they also have c
defaulthildren placed by other Local Authorities in foster placements within their areas. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAlex Cunningham MP asked about the supply of foster placements within boroughs 
defaultand what boroughs do to secure these
default(Q165). I would like
default, if I may,
default to clarify
default and add to
default th
defaulte point
defaults
default which I made.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe boroughs regularly run recruitment campaigns for foster carers, once these foster carers have been through the approval process they await suitable placements. To ensure the most efficient use of these placements 
defaultboroughs will c
defaultonsider requests from other Local Authorities where they so not have a suitable young person awaiting placement themselves. In North London this sharing is formalised via the North London Adoption and Fostering Consortium (NLAFC).
default Between April and August 
defaultof 2013, the last period for which figures are available, 16 such placements were made under this sharing agreement.
default&#xa0;
defaultNone of the NLSA boroughs has a sufficient supply of in-house foster carers to care for all the children within their boroughs who require
default placements, nor is this a question purely of numbers. Sometimes in order to find a good match for a young person a very specialist family needs to be found. This specialism may relate to cultural or religious needs or may be to do with specialist skills i
defaultn handling disabilities or emotionally challenging behaviour.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn order to find the wide variety of placements required in a timely fashion the boroughs rely on Independent Fostering Agencies
default (IFA’s)
default. 
defaultThese agencies carry out their own recruitment and once
default approved an agency may accept a referral from any local authority, not just the one where the 
defaultfoster 
defaultcarer is resident
default, this led to my point about boroughs receiving children from other local authorities into care placements within their boundaries
default.
default This 
defaultis a particular issue, as I mentioned, for boroughs whose housing stock is more suitable for fostering because of space requirements for instance.
default&#xa0;
defaultNLSA has recently undertaken a commissioning exercise to stimulate the market and increase the number of ind
defaultependent fostering placements available in our sub-region
default. This has come about because we recognise that in order to provide an attractive level of business for providers we are stronger if we work together. This is particularly the case where we are looki
defaultng for specialist placements where the needs group are low incidence, for example with certain disabilities or placements for young people on remand. For this reason t
defaulthe tendering exercise has been undertaken in partnership with a further 5 boroughs across
default East London. We are currently in the process of evaluating the bids received and in January 2014 we hope to sign contracts with around 50 agencies to provide approximately 1000 foster placements annually across north and east London. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI would like to tha
defaultnk the Committee for the opportunity to present this evidence, if you require any further information on this, or on the plans which NLSA has to carry out similar commissioning activity for residential placements during 2014, then I would be pleased to pro
defaultvide this.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default