&#xa0;
defaultAFS0048defaultWritten evidence submitted by Alan defaultMottersheaddefault, (Headteacher, Trinity School, Carlisle)defaultA view from the headteacher of an academydefaultA submission to the Select Committee inquiry into certain aspects of the academies programme
defaultWhile the examples used in this document are taken from my own school and from other schools in Carlisle, the views expressed are just my own. 
default _________________________________________________________________________________
default1
default              
defaultIntroduction 
default1.1
default              
defaultTrinity S
defaultchool had been a grant maintained school until April 1999, when we became a Voluntary Aided School. In September 2011 we became a Church of England academy. The conversion process for the school was extra-ordinarily difficult and complicated, with differen
defaultt interested parties (such as the Local Authority, Cumbria, and the Diocese of Carlisle) each wanting a say in how things were to be resolved and in such nuanced detail that it protracted the process
default.
defaultThis meant that valuable time for senior leaders was ta
defaultken away from the core work of the school. I do not think that we had anticipated that. We had hoped for something akin to ‘opting out’ in the 1990’s, but it was not and certainly our expectations of what would happen after conversion have followed in the 
defaultsame way: it remains very complex, and I think that I would say excessively so.
default1.2
default              
defaultIn addition to that, the freedoms we had hoped for in education terms have not materialised. Rather we have seen an increase in centrally controlled and administered data e
defaultvaluations of the school, as with all others, and we have not been able to develop the curriculum as we would have liked
default, given what we were led to expect as an academy
default. The freedoms offered have been organisational: to fix holiday dates, conditions of emp
defaultloyment, collaboration with other schools etc. We had hoped to be able to develop our own pathways based curriculum, with something fairly bespoke for each student or group of students. Instead, 
defaultwe have to
default comply with the new measures, such as Progress 8, 
defaultin designing the essence of our curriculum offer for our students.
default It is now far less fit for purpose as an academy than it was before, but that is not of our making.
default2
default              
defaultNarrowing the gap for disadvantaged students
default2.1
default              
defaultWe feel that we had done this very wel
defaultl by 2010, with a diversified curriculum meaning that the difficulties of a formal exam based GCSE scheme were not imposed on all students but rather we had a good blend of vocational and experience based offers for students. We had not chosen diplomas or 
defaultthe fill-them-in-quick on-line schemes which have been 
defaultrightly 
defaultdiscredited and withdrawn. Our BTEC, ASDAN, and CoPE courses engaged students and then did well. For example, nine fairly disaffected Year 11 boys had places at the local FE college on the youn
defaultg apprenticeship scheme, and each was successful in completing the course, and securing an apprenticeship. That has sadly gone, as has so much else. 
default2.2
default              
defaultWhile the first style sponsored academies were established in demanding urban areas, the Academies Act
default of 2010 ushered in the new wave of 
defaultconverter
default academies, where the focus was something very different. 
defaultThese were 
defaultthe 
defaultmore successful often middle-class schools. Nevertheless, t
defaulthe freedoms of
defaultfered by 
default academy status 
defaultto such schools c
defaultould have helped us to 
defaultcontinue to 
defaultdevelop a range of courses and combinations for students. Raise-online and other performance indicator data point the opposite way, and we worry for the return to disaffection which such an academic, exam based 
defaultprogramme 
defaultcould produce
default in academ
defaulties or in other schools
default.
default2.3
default              
defaultCentralised, data-based management of the school system to define a  ‘transformational impact’ as higher exam grades will not do the task hoped for it. Rather it runs the risk of having the exact opposite effect. 
default3
default              
defaultCompelling 
defaultacademisation 
default3.1
default              
defaultThis has been one of the most unfortunate aspects of the current scheme. If it is thought that being an academy is the best way of being a school and running the school, then we should all be one. 
defaultHowever, there t
defaulthen seem to be no time a
defaultt all between a ‘failing’ Ofsted report and a move to require the school to become an academy, which almost sounds punitive rather than an opportunity for that school. 
defaultThis is an odd dichotomy in the system.
default3.2
default              
defaultThe experience of secondary schooling in Car
defaultlisle has been badly marred by the 2008 reoganisation of schools, creating two sponsored academ
defaulties, with local sponsors and more recently 
default a national company take-over. Both schools are now in Special Measures and the loss of good staff from them, and incr
defaulteased admission pressures on other schools
default,
default have been v
defaultery detrimental to all parties, not least to the young people of the city and their families. This seems to present a clear case of enforcing academy status being ineffective.
default3.3
default              
defaultWhile just one exampl
defaulte, the process of take-over, closure and replacement is not 
defaultthen 
defaultguaranteed to  produce the desired changes. The picture must by definition be more complicated, which is what we ought to expect. 
default4
default              
defaultThe role of the Secretary of State
default4.1
default              
defaultIt seems very odd t
defaulthat one person should have such a hands-on role in this process
default in a national system of education
default. It should not be this office-holder or her/his office which is responsible 
default– this is a 
defaulthuge 
defaultscheme which needs a proper structure to oversee it.
default If there is to be a different structure, then it should not come as an addition to the present situation. Precisely because the present state cannot obtain in the longer term, whatever is new has to be replacement and simplification. 
default5
default              
defaultThe wider organisa
defaulttion 
default5.1
default              
defaultWith the increased powers of the Secretary of State, another new and punitive Ofsted framework, the uncertainty of the future of key players in the sector (what is to become of the National College for Teaching and Leadership?) and the crumbling 
defaultof the local authority structure under budget cuts, the picture to someone like me inside the system is that it is fragmented and in parts chaotic. We do not have any free schools in our area to complicate things further, but we do have a UTC on the west 
defaultc
defaultoast of Cumbria, where there a
defaultre already surplus places in the secondary sector. Something needs to be done, either to remove Local Authorities and be done with it, and then to replace them with a simpler and more effective structure, or to re-instate them
default, but again with their functions streamlined and competent. 
default6
default              
defaultAcademy chains
default6.1
default              
defaultThe loss of self-determination for a school is a significant thing, and the rise of the executive headteacher, with a wider role in several schools rather than ‘owning’ one, 
defaultis a substantial part of the question we should be asking. The sense of the learning community of a school, with shared knowledge and history and traditions, is also an important part of defining what a village or part of a town is about. There seems to be
default an intent to do away with so much of that. 
defaultI went to the dinner at the end of Habergham High School in Burnley, where I used to teach. It had been the former boys’ and girls’ grammar schools but had managed to go through the comprehensive programme, only
default to be swept away in a new and academy-based reorganisation. 1559 – 2007 the paperweight says. It was also very sad to see the demolition of the old Girls’ County High School in Carlisle, which had been St Aidan’s, and now has been replaced by a 
default‘
defaultdreadful’
default (my view) building, a new 1960s prefab with atrium and 
defaultgreen 
defaultvinyl but without beauty and unlikely to create for itself a story which becomes a history. I am very unsure about why we are doing this.
default6.2
default              
defaultMy 
default fear about academy chains: it is a business mode
defaultl, the local corner shops all join together, but they lose their ide
defaultntity and belonging by doing so, are taken over
default, and we have done something to state schools that independent schools would not countenance.
default7
default              
defaultPrimary schools
default7.1
default              
defaultOf course they are too sm
defaultall to do become academies in the main, and it would not have been difficult to restrict academies to secondary (and all-through?) schools, and produce something different for primary schools, especially the many small ones. The insistence on academies has
default not been wise. 
defaultTherefore,  the cluster/chain/consortium approach is produced. It does seem as if the schools are being massaged to fit the scheme rather than the scheme allowing schools to become what they want to be. The incremental notion of sustainabl
defaulte change is not part of the present approach, sadly. Schools do work together and should develop that strongly. In due course, this may lead to an academy chain or multi-academy trust. However, excessive speed and great complexity in arrangements are not g
defaultood features in their own right and certainly not in one place.
default8
default              
defaultFailing schools 
default8.1
default              
defaultThere may be some schools which are 100% outstanding – every lesson, every student etc. It seems unlikely: we are much more likely to have, say, 40% superb, 40% good, 15% OK and 5% not so good or poor, across every institution. The question is one of descr
defaultiption and how far a single word can do justice to the state of play of one school, even a small village primary school. There is also a question about the likely long term success of a system which is ‘failure driven.’ 
default8.2
default              
defaultBefore we ask what structure or
default system would work best to improve a school which, in some areas, is not doing so well as we would like, we ought to ask about what the ingredients are for a creating and describing a good school. It may have much more to do with the quality of the staff w
defaultho work there and who lead the school, rather than a wider organisational scheme.
default8.3
default              
defaultTherefore there should be far less interest in academies or chains or free schools – and much more about the professions and the professionalism of the people who work in
default schools. I recall hearing about the Finland model and feeling that this was very much at the heart of things: a Masters trained teaching force, with a high tariff on professional development but within a non-evaluative non-data driven system
default, no inspectio
defaultns, no exams – but a real value on education not simply 
defaultper se
default but because it is the knowledge, skills and understanding that the students actually have that matter, not the statistics of the grades they have achieved in tests.
default8.4
default              
defaultOne school in south Cumb
defaultria went into Special Measures and then the follow-up inspection one year later found it to be Outstanding. This does trouble me. I wonder if Raise-online is actually a seriously damaging and deeply flawed piece of apparatus, but one which has achieved the
default status of an unchallengeable authority on school performance which it certainly is not. 
default9
default              
defaultWrong priorities
default9.1
default              
defaultPerhaps w
defaulthether a school is an academy or not may, in the 
defaultlonger term of things, prove to be not really important at all
default.
default9.2
default              
default ‘Grant maintaine
defaultd’ status was short lived, and ‘direct grant’ grammar schools slightly longer – but they have passed. The current fragmentation cannot 
defaultstay
default in the longer term – and the present uncertainty is in itself unhelpful. The lack of any sense of direction for the 
defaultwhole vessel is troubling, with the removal of ‘old certainties’ 
defaultfrom schools, 
defaultsuch as the annual incremental progression, 1265 hours, 190 days, schools having the same holiday patterns, the validity of exam marking etc being corrosive for a profession cri
defaultticised as never before. ‘Curriculum 2000’ was meant to be the defining change to post 16 A levels – but we have had five more since then..? So it may not be the nature of acad
defaultemies themselves but rather the
default chaotic upheaval, masquerading as deep system ch
defaultange, which will characterise these few years when we look back upon them. 
default9.3
default              
defaultThat being the case, something different again will be needed from 2015-2020 in place of the current mincemeat mess that schools are being pressed into.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default