&#xa0;
defaultAFS0060defaultWritten evidence submitted by Francesca Hintondefault1.0default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultSummarydefaultThe Select Committee has called
default for 
defaultwritten
default evidence 
defaulton
default the effectiveness of academy status for schools. This submission focusses only on the f
defaultifth
default reference raised of: 
default“
defaultThe appropriateness of academy status for 
defaultprimary schools
default and what special factors apply”
default.
defaultRecommended as crucial for consideration in this inquiry are the contextual factors of rurality and size. It is vital to acknowledge how corresponding factors, such as limited available resources and geograp
defaulthical coherence in smaller rural primaries can limit the opportunities offered to them by academy status. The following concerns must be raised: 
defaultSide-lined, yet also critical to this inquiry is the effect that greater academisation is having upon those schools 
defaultthat rely upon LA support. Reduced funding for non-academies that remain with the LA can leav
defaulte schools vulnerable and facing
default closure or academisation. With smaller primaries most reliant upon LA support, this is a significant note of consideration
default on the a
defaultppropriateness of academisation
default for this inquiry. 
default2.0default 
defaultIntroductiondefaultThis submission is the product of extensive research that included contacting county councils, interviewing once council’s Assistant Director of Children’s Services, and analysing both com
defaultmittee reports and academy statistics at a regional and national level. 
defaultIt is compiled with the aim of raising schools standards and achievements in rural areas, where these can fall significantly below the national average. In my own county of Norfolk, r
defaultesults and achievements have fallen to the extent where 40% of primaries were rated by Ofsted as “Less than good” in comparison to a national average of 31%
default.
default With the experience of attending an Academy in such a rural setting, it is my concern that the co
defaultmparative difficulties facing these smaller schools in rural areas are not relegated from the public agenda.
defaultRaising standards through competition: the case of alternative service providersdefault&#xa0;default3.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAcademy conversion 
defaultoffers
default schools the freedom to either continue purchasing services from their LA, or seek more competitive alternatives elsewhere. Yet, 
defaultthis freedom of choice 
defaulthas been
default contextually limited. 
defaultInterviewing
default the Assistant Director of Children’s Services from one Count
defaulty Council
default,
default 
defaultan
default absence of 
defaultalternative providers
default in rural areas
default was cited
default 
defaultas evident
default from
default 
defaultthe
default lack
default of competitive standards
default in these areas
default. This could mean advantage
defaults
default of academy conversion 
defaultare
default potentially stagnated
default in rural schools
default when there is little comp
defaultetition
default or choice
default between service providers from which to drive up standards.
default&#xa0;
default3.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThese schools can
default face
default the
default alternatives of either: i) remaining
default to purchase services form the Lo
defaultcal Authority or ii) outsourcing
default to other providers less local to the area. 
defaultConti
defaultnuing to purchase services from the LA can
default potentially
default problematise 
defaultefficiencies in provision 
defaultwhen LA standards are poor or below par. 
defaultSchools that comparatively choose to outsource service provision to a less local provider may face similar issues of effi
defaultciency due to the lack of geographical proximity. 
default&#xa0;
default3.3
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn the context of small primary academies
default without local alternatives
default, ii) 
defaultis
default a particularly ineffective solution. This is due to the great strategic capacity required to coordinate this service provision.  
defaultWith fewer resources in specialist staff and a reduced institutional capacity, 
defaultthese
default schools
default may
default face greater difficulty in ou
defaulttsourcing and maintaining the most competitive providers from more distant locations. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIf academy conversion is to be an effective solution for small
defaulter
default primaries in rural areas, there must be a sufficient range of local alternatives for the provision of s
defaultervices.
default This is particularly vital in instances where the Local Authority’s 
defaultquality and efficiency in services is of a poor standard.
default&#xa0;defaultThe role of the LA in the formation of partnerships between schoolsdefault&#xa0;default4.0
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultPartnerships 
defaultare 
defaultfrequently cited as
default an effective solution for smaller schools lacking the resources required to outsource the most competitive providers.
default 
defaultWhereby
default encouraging
default schools to pool resources together
default may 
defaultincrease smaller schools’ institutional capacity and encourage greater 
defaulteconomies of scale to be achieved
default. 
defaultYet, context is
default a prevalent issue for consideration here when some schools face greater difficulties than others in coordinating the formation of these partnerships.
default 
default&#xa0;
default4.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIn their previous inquiry into the effectiveness of p
defaultartnerships for secondary schools alone, the committee recommended that those “In which all members are located in within close proximity are most likely to be effective”
default. This concern of the committee 
defaultis similarly prevalent to the 
defaultcase of primary academi
defaultes. 
defaultWith
default a greater numeracy and more widely distributed location 
defaultacross counties, issues of geographical proximity 
defaultcan
default potentially
default be
default exacerbated more greatly 
defaultfor
default the context of
default these
default small, rural primaries. 
default&#xa0;
default3.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe role of the Local Authority could be key t
defaulto coordinating efforts between these schools in the formation of effective partnerships. In a report on academy strategies, the Norfolk County Council noted the “considerable strategic capacity”
default 
default required to encourage groups of primary s
defaultchools to set up t
defaultheir own 
defaultarrangements 
defaultor form local partnerships
default. With the 
defaultLA
default needing to evolve to the recent conditions of academies within the educational landscape, a role of coordination could match the expertise 
defaultin
default local knowledge of these authorities with the ability to increase educational standards. 
defaultThis is particularly vital to smaller rural primaries, where the LA could 
defaultcontribute to increasing their
default institutional capacity by encouraging a pooling together of r
defaultesources, expertise and knowledge between schools. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe impact of academisation on small primaries that rely upon LA supportdefault&#xa0;default3.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultRelegated from the terms of this inquiry are the effects of academisation on the support framework of the LA. It is evident that 
defaultincreased academisation can significantly affect the ability of the LA to continue to fund those non-academies, with smaller primaries most at risk. If an LA is no longer required to provide non-statutory school support services to academies, they 
defaultrisk rec
defaulteiving
default a 
defaultsignificant reduction in their
default revenue grant. This could subsequently affect their ability to support financially those schools that remain under their provision.
default&#xa0;
default3.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultIt is in particular those smaller primary schools that are at greatest risk from su
defaultbsequent issues of funding when they are the most reliant upon the LA for support for resources. The Lincolnshire County Council warned 
defaultpreviously
default of how the implementation of the current Academies policy could lead to 184 out of 276 primary schools being 
defaultat risk of closure from a reduced revenue grant
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.3
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe pertinence of this issue in funding is reflected in how the LCC was subsequently forced to admit that it no longer had the financial capacity with which to fund those remaining schools under its suppo
defaultrt. That it recommended these schools’ conversion to academy status and 
defaultmembership to
default a trust located hundreds of miles away demonstrates the clear failures in the funding system for Local Authorities. 
default&#xa0;
default3.4
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThis
default incident reflects two issues for consideration: 1) That the appropriation of funds to the Local Authority must be adjusted to account for the increased academisation of schools and separation from LA support 2) That rather than recommending smaller school
defaults to join trusts located miles away, the role of the LA would better be appropriated to use is local knowledge and expertise to coordinate local trust formations. With small rural primaries most at risk of reduced funding in LA support, this is a pertinent
default issue of consideration for this committee inquiry
default on the effects of the academisation process.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default “A good school for every Norfolk learne
defaultr”
default Report by the Director of Children’s Services
default (April 2013) 
defaulthttp://www.norfolk.gov.uk/view/cabinet080413item14pdf
default Telephone interview
default with Assistant Director of Children’s Services
default c
defaultonducted December 7
defaultth
default 2013. 
default “Geographical Coherence”, Education Committee Report 
defaultSchool Partnerships and Cooperation
default. 52-56.
default “A revised Academy Strategy for Norfolk” (November 2011) 
defaultht
defaulttp://www.norfolk.gov.uk/view/cabinet141111item10pdf
default “The Council’s leadership role within a changing education system” Lincolnshire County Council,  (July 2011) http://www.lgcplus.com/Journals/3/Files/2011/8/3/Lincolnshire%20schools%20report.pdf
default