&#xa0;
defaultAFS0069default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Devon County Councildefault&#xa0;
defaultQ1.  The effectiveness of academisationdefault in narrowing the gap for disadvantaged children, and what further steps should be taken within the academies system to bring about a transformational impact on student outcomes;default&#xa0;
defaultIn Devon the academy programme has not 
defaultyet 
defaultseen an overall transformation in
default outcomes for student outcomes. For example, of the 20 secondary schools that have converted to become academies, seven saw a decline in GCSE performance in 2013 against an overall rise in performance across the county. However there are examples of except
defaultional increases in performance in academies.
default&#xa0;
default Ilfracombe College reported a 24% increase in 5+ A-
defaultC grades including English and M
defaultaths in 2013 compared to 2012
default.  Their 
defaultconversion 
defaultwas 
defaultin May 2013
default just weeks before the examinations
default.
default&#xa0;
default There is little evidence 
defaultin this authority that academisation has brought about any swifter progress in narrowing gaps in performance.
default&#xa0;
defaultLocal authorities have had their powers of intervention in academy schools removed. They have also lost funding when schools converted. However authorities retain responsibilities for 
defaultboth 
defaultthe 
defaulteducational outcomes and 
defaultwelfare of all children in their local
defaultity particularly the most vulnerable. Devon has developed an academy protocol that sets out how it will relate to academy schoo
defaultls and resolve any difficulties but this protocol is yet to be fully tested with regard to challenging underperformance.
default&#xa0;
defaultOfsted 
defaulthave made it clear in their framework for inspecting LA school improvement services that LAs should continue to support, monitor and challenge all schools. Devon continues to do so but the arrangements for challenging academy schools judged to Require Impr
defaultovement by Ofsted are still being developed in practice. The Local Authority is aware that it can report any concerns it has regarding the performance of academies to the Secretary of State.
default&#xa0;
default Devon hopes to continue to retain sufficiently positive relation
defaultships with academy schools
default so
default that it 
defaultdoes not need to resort to this 
defaultbut the differing roles of the DfE and the Local Authority needs to be better defined in relation to 
defaultunderperforming academies.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ2.  The process for approving, compelling and defaultestablishing academies and free schools, including working with sponsors;default&#xa0;
defaultDevon has a 
defaultgood
default 
defaultworking relationship with the O
defaultffice of Schools Commissioner
default regarding underperforming schools. 
defaultIf a school is deemed to need rapid improvement and a structural so
defaultlution is necessary then the LA and DFE have worked 
defaulttogether to 
defaultmove the school to
default becoming an academy with a sponsor. 
default We
default have al
defaultso worked together on identifying
default an appropriate sponsor.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultQ3.default&#xa0;default The role of the Secretary of State in intervening in and supporting failing academies, and how this role will work as the programme expands; default&#xa0;defaultThere have been no failing academies in D
defaultevon so far. T
defaulthe capacity of the Secretary of State to monitor chal
defaultlenge and support all academy schools in difficulty 
defaultmay be 
defaultinsufficient 
defaultwithout reference to
default a range of 
defaultlocal 
defaultschool improvement solutions
default.  T
defaulthe proposed Regional Commissioners will not have
default a
default detailed local knowledge or 
defaultbe accountable to the local communi
defaultty.
default  The proposed Board of
default Academy Head
defaultteacher
defaults will 
defaultnot reflect the
default full
default diversit
defaulty of successful partnerships or
default outstanding 
defaultschool 
defaultleaders within Devon.  
default&#xa0;
defaultQ4.default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThe functions and responsibilities in relation to academies and free schools of local defaultauthorities and other organisations operating between the Secretary of State and individual schools; what these functions and responsibilities should be; and what gaps there are in support for schools at this level;default&#xa0;
defaultLocal Authorities retain over 200 statu
defaulttory responsibilities for children regardless of the settings they attend.  Ofsted have also laid out clear and robust expectations of how Local Authorities need to fulfil their responsibilities for securing school improvement.  There should be no tension 
defaultbetween a 
defaultdiverse, 
defaultself improving school system and the inv
defaultolvement of a Local Authority
default securing the best possible outcome
defaults for all children in every setting
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ5.default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWhat role academy chains play or should play in the new school landscape; how accountable they are; and what issues they raise with regard to governance arrangements;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default default&#xa0;
defaultThere is often a lack of clarity around the roles and responsibilities and
default diffe
defaultrent levels of governance within
default complex multi-academy models.  This can lead to a reduction in accountabilities.  The differing legal respo
defaultnsibilities of
default governors, charity t
defaultrustees 
defaultand company directors require
default strengthening and 
defaultgreater 
defaultclarity.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ6.  defaultThe appropriateness of academy status for primary schools and what special factors apply;default&#xa0;default and what evidence there is that academy status can bring value for money either for individual primary schools or for the system as a whole;default&#xa0;
defaultSmaller Primary Schools
default would
default more easily embrace academy status if part of a group but this would drive greater economies and efficiencies if based on a federation infrastructure, 
default(one governing body, one budget and usually one executive headteacher).
default  
defaultHeadteachers and governor
defaults 
defaultare now more aware of the increased responsibility and workload which
default in their view
default often can outweigh any benefits.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ7.  default&#xa0;defaultWhat alternatives to sponsored academy status should be offdefaulterdefaulted to failing primary schools; defaultThedefault purpose of becoming a sponsored academy is to promote rapid improvemedefaultnt in an underperforming school;default&#xa0;
defaultThe objective is a better deal for the children rather than the academy conversion. If there was another convincing and credible local solution that can bring about such a transformation then it should be considered.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultFor example, an outstanding school ma
defaulty provide the necessary support to bring about the change required without the need to resort to a change in status. In Devon we have a number of examples of federations and management partnerships that have resulted in swift school 
defaultimprovement 
defaultbut this ha
defaults been due to the exceptional leaders and not the
default 
defaultorganisational structure.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013default              
default