&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default              
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultThe College of Social Workdefault default&#xa0;
defaultThe College of Social Work (TCSW) 
defaultis the centre of excellence for social work and provides resources to its members to uphold and 
defaultstrengthen standards of professional practice
default. 
defaultIt holds the professional standards for social work, supports the professional development of social workers, and campaigns on issues relating to social work policy and practice.  An independent membership org
defaultanisation, The College provides quality assurance for initial and post-qualifying education through its training and education endorsement scheme.
default&#xa0;
defaultLike colleges for other professions, our role is todefault:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultFrequency, scope and impact of consultationsdefault&#xa0;defaultTCSW notes that a number of recent Ofsted consultations have been published with a very limited time period in which to respond. We would ask that, if possible
default, this does not occur in the future in order that we can all continue to work together constructively.  As an organisation with a duty and responsibility to consult our membership, Professional Assembly and Children and Families Faculty, it does pose diffi
defaultculties for TCSW when short timescales are offered for consultations.  
default&#xa0;
defaultOfsted and its decision making and impactdefault&#xa0;
defaultAs has been acknowledged by the ADCS, the LGA and Ofsted itself, the judgments reached including, in particular, the grading can have significant consequences for a local 
defaultauthority and
default seriously impact upon morale and, indeed, imperil the very improvements
default required.  There are concerns among a range of stakeholders particularly in a climate of austerity about the role being played by Ofsted in contributing to unhelpful pressures upon local authorities seeking to deliver excellent services. TCSW would sugges
defaultt  that some form of independent advisory group composed of key stakeholders, including members of the TCSW, should work with Ofsted to explore how quality is defined and to
default  support  the development of risk management
default (as recommended by the Munro Review) 
defaultcultures and learning organisations. 
default&#xa0;defaultTCSW believes that the voice of social work should be at the core of the inspection and a mechanism in place which would help with the analysis of work place culture, allowing management to identify early on any press
defaulture points that are impacting
default on
default good practice. TCSW would argue that the Principal Children and Family Social Worker (PSW), a key recommendation of the Munro Review, offers a means of linking frontline issues to strategic management. We have established a
default PSW network in conjunction with the Department for Education
default. H
defaultowever
default,
default we are concerned that the rate of adoption greatly contrasts among different local authorities. We would like to see incorporated within the inspection framework an indication of wheth
defaulter an authority has a 
defaultPSW in place. TCSW will do the utmost to ensure that these PSW’s are supported and linked to other PSWs across England.
default&#xa0;
defaultPractice Improvement Roledefault&#xa0;
defaultTCSW notes the proposed addition of the practice improvement role to the Ofsted remit
default and have welcomed our involvement in early discussions. G
defaultiven that this greatly strengthens
default the position of Ofsted with respect to the definition of a quality social work service to children and families, we consider it even more essential that an indepen
defaultdent advisory group (as referred to above)
default 
defaultis involved in discussions about the parameters of the role and in a consult
defaultative capacity with respect to 
defaultthe judgements mad
defaulte about how to improve quality.
default TCSW has been working with one local authority to develo
defaultp an action plan to support the professional development and supervision of social workers by mapping training needs to the Professional Capabilities Framework. While still in its early stages, TCSW expects to expand this role further in the future 
defaultfor
default aut
defaulthorities where Ofsted have made recommendations for improvements.
default&#xa0;
defaultEmployee standardsdefault&#xa0;defaultThe pressure of high caseload volumes is very often cited by social workers as a form
defaultidable barrier to good practice, although
default defining what constitutes a ‘hig
defaulth’ number 
defaultis difficult
default. A single case could involve intensive work over a period of many months, while another might feasibly be ‘closed’ within a matter of days. As such, TCSW would like to see a focus on how social work
default cases and tasks 
defaultare allocated, supervised, a
defaultnd evaluated. The Standards for Employers and Supervision Framewor
defaultk developed by the Social Work T
defaultask Force must take on greater significance within the inspection framework to ensure that social workers have manageable workloads and receive appropriate su
defaultpervision. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMulti-agency inspectionsdefault&#xa0;
defaultOfsted has announced that multi-agency inspections will begin from April 2015. These inspections were due to begin this year but were postponed due to operational issues. While it is crucial that these issues are iron
defaulted out, TCSW notes that Scotland has been conducting multi-agency inspections for a number of years
default already. Given the frequency with which
default significant coordination issues
default are highlighted
default in Serious Case Reviews, TCSW would urge that these inspections are 
defaultnot delayed any further. The evaluation of the Daniel Pelka and Keanu Williams cases contained similarities with regards to multi-agency coordination and information sharing. We would therefore like to better establish what constitutes ‘good’ practice in t
defaulterms of regular and effective monitoring and evaluation of multi-agency practice. 
defaultMonitoring
default the effectiveness of inter-agency and in
defaultter-professional collaborative 
defaultpractice should be examined 
defaultat all levels of case management and all levels of service deliv
defaultery, from early help to adoption or reunification from care. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWhile there is an implicit expectation for social care and early help services to interact, we believe that that the relevant indicator, without being overly-prescriptive, should go further in 
defaultdefining what this might practically entail. TCSW consider
defaults
default that name
defaultd social workers should play a 
defaultconsultative role as members of early help teams around families and a key case management role for all teams around families in which a child
default is assessed as ‘in need’ of 
defaultadditional family support, child protection
default,
default or 
defaulta 
defaultlooked after child or transition to adulthood service. 
default&#xa0;defaultThe voice of children and families default&#xa0;defaultIt is extremely important that those who use services are at the heart of the inspe
defaultction process. How is the child’s journey placed at the heart of the 
defaultprocess?
default This is mentioned in the descriptors but 
defaultmore detail
default is required in relation to 
defaultthe process
default. Moreover, we consider it vital that that engagement is wit
defaulth families in the widest se
defaultnse.
default Children’s own perspectives on who they consider family and who matters to them has been recognised in Family Group Conferences and in evaluations of intensive outreach and child protection services as offering productive possibilities for safety plan
defaultning and decision making. These evaluations could provide a strong methodology for the inspection process and we would encourage collaboration with researchers when testing the dimensions to be used in deciding on the approaches to improving services to be
default recommended by Ofsted.  
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default