&#xa0;defaultAFS0082defaultWritten evidence submitted by Edward CainesdefaultGateway Free School Resultsdefault and Manor Primary KS2 ClosuredefaultManor Primar
defaulty School is a school in a
default deprived area of Tilbury.  The junior school
default had  previously been in an Ofsted category but the infant school was classed as good. The headteacher of the infant school became the headteacher of the amalgamated primary school but over this time had cancer and was away from school for most of a year f
defaultollowing surgery
default and chemotherapy
default.  Coming back from this and handing the amalgamation
default of these
default challenging schools she had the further challenge of Gateway specifically targeting her year 5 pupils to move to Gateway in year 6. Parents were told at Gateway
default meetings that if they did not move children to the school they would be unlikely to get a place there. The only other secondary school within walking distance had just failed its Ofsted. Parents who were among the most concerned about their child’s second
defaultary schooling were most likely to take this action
default and their
default children were often those who were already working at level four or higher. A number of local schools including Manor, Lansdowne, Chadwell St Mary, Woodside, East Tilbury and Little Thurrock were
default affected but Manor and Lansdowne most of all.
defaultWith no support from its local secondary school and questionable support from the LA Manor Primary was failed by Ofsted this summer. However,
default recently released p
defaultrimary school league tables show 
defaultthat the Gatewa
defaulty Free School has scored significantly less than Manor Primary on a number of key measures.   Only 66% of Gateway children gained the expected level 4 in reading, writing a
defaultnd mathematics compared to 70% 
defaultat Manor and 
default72%
default for Thurrock as a whole.
defaultManor is cu
defaultrrently being forced to become a sponsored academy as part of the Gateway group with the principal of the Gateway who contributed to its demise now as CEO. It has 
defaultsubsequently been
default decided
default that the Manor KS2 children will be moved on block to the Gateway F
defaultree School. Manor will continue as an infant school and become primary again in the future but with a reduced size. 
defaultLansdowne
default 
defaultSchool
default is also being reduced by a form of entry. Clearly these actions are being put in place to fill the free school and create t
defaulthe illusion it was needed. It is not being filled as free schools are intended to be
default,
default by parents who have made a free choice of it as a preferred school.
default 
default 
defaultThe Free School results were
default presumably
default poor because t
defaulthe techniques that 
defaultmade Gateway Sec
defaultondary so a
defaultpparently successful:
default early and repeated entry to examina
defaulttions and m
defaultodules and 
defaultentering children
default for 
defaulteasier 
defaultso-
defaultcalled “equivalent” diplomas are not 
defaultavailable in the primary sector. 
defaultIn primary schools c
defaulthildren
default all 
defaultsit the same test on the same day and it gets sent away to be marked. Except 
defaultof course 
defaultfor the new writing assessment which was the teachers’ 
defaultown 
defaultappraisal of children’s work th
defaultr
defaultough the year and which
default,
default surprise, surprise, Gateway did rather better at.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default