&#xa0;
defaultThe Association of Directors of Children's Services 
default(ADCS) 
defaultvalues the
default opportunity to respond to the c
defaultall for evidence into Academies and Free Schools. 
defaultADCS 
defaultis the professional association for directors of children's services an
defaultd their senior management teams.
default 
defaultUnder the
default provisions of the 
defaultChildren Act 2004, the DCS
default 
defaultis
default the 
defaultchief
default officer responsible for the discharge of local authority functions 
defaultwith regard to 
defaultthe education of all children in their local area
default. 
defaultT
defaulthe DCS provides a clear and unambiguous line of 
defaultprofessional
default accountability for children’s services
default, including education
default and
default 
defaultas such, has a particular interest in
default the
default performance of academies and free sch
defaultools
default.
default Directors of children’s services 
defaultare
default statutorily responsible for the education of every child in their local area regardless of where they receive their schooling. ADCS believes that
default local authorities have
default a key role to play in the improvement and pe
defaultrformance of all schools
default regard of their designation, and as such 
defaulth
defaultas a pro-active interest in the governance and scrutiny of academies and free schools. 
defaultThe announcement of the establishment of eight regional commissioners for education by the Department for Education in December 2013 h
defaultas
default added a new dimension to the intervention and monitoring of academies and free schools. At the moment it is u
defaultnclear what role the new commissioners will have in monitoring and intervening in low performing academies that are not currently failing.
default 
defaultIt must be the goal of all involved to prevent schools from failing in the first place, rather than simply issuing wa
defaultrning notices or using other intervention powers after the failure has occurred. R
defaultegional commissioners will not be directly
default nor democratically
default accountable locally and the size and structure of the
default eight
default regions mean it is unlikely that they will be able t
defaulto develop the detailed understanding of local schools that the local authority has. 
defaultFurther clarification on the role of regional commissioners in monitoring and challenging low performing academies and free schools
default, and their proposed interaction with the
default role of the local authority,
default would be most welcome. 
defaultChains of academies are not currently subject to inspection as local authorities are. We would advocate that inspection of academy chains, and the support they provide for their schools is subject to in
defaultspection by Ofsted in the future. 
defaultThe underperformance of any school should be subject to local scrutiny, and if possible a locally provided solution
default should be found
default before academy status is considered. At present any formal action
default taken
default by a local authority to secure improved performance in an underperforming school, such as the use of warning notices or an IEB appears to be a trigger for the consideration of a 
defaultforced conversion
default to academy status
default by the Department for Education
default. Allowing
default local authorities to intervene and 
defaultsecure
default locally delivered solutions to improve schools would be preferable to the swift conversion to academy status. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default