&#xa0;
defaultAFS0089defaultWritten evidence submitted by Peter defaultCanselldefault&#xa0;defaultPoints to be addresseddefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultThere is no evidence to support this. Inde
defaulted most voluntary converters have not changed things, so why would it work?
defaultThis process has taken a very long time to become embedded, if
default indeed this now the case. It is extremely expensive, especially in terms of staffing in Local Authorities. 
default 
defaultSchools forced to become academies because they are judged to be inadequate are often back to being graded as good before a sponsor is identified, 
defaultthey should therefore have the choice of not becoming an academy but this option seems not to exist.
defaultThis role is totally unsustainable and the appointment of new regional panels would suggest that the secretary of state has finally recognised this. It would seem that there is a possibility that this will eventually lead to the establishment of something 
defaultsimilar to 
defaultsome of 
defaultthe role
defaults
default previously played by Local Authorit
defaulties.
defaultThis is proving to be a nightmare for Local Authorities in respect of pupil place planning, standards and safeguarding. There seems to be n
defaulto consideration of local needs by the secretary of state when funding academy expansion. No consultation takes place regarding capital funding. When there is a need locally for extra places the Local authority has no powers to require academies to expand, 
defaultif all schools become academies how will this be resolved?
defaultIt appears that some chains 
defaultare only in it for the money. They 
defaultare not 
defaultaccountable 
defaultto the elected Local Authority and are not required to keep Local Authorities informed. Education is for the betterment of all children regardless of where they live and this entitlement is being erode
defaultd by inward looking, self seeking organisations. There are no chains who are capable of managing even a medium sized local authority collection of schools and there is no requirement for them to work together as chains, thus defeating the object of being m
defaultore collaborative. Who are the people with control over these bodies? They are not elected, they do not need to have academic qualifications and it appears from recent events that they often do not regard their staff in schools to require these either. It 
defaultcould be very soon that questions are raised about who is running our schools, in the way that other organisations who have taken over public sector responsibilities in recent years, have been found wanting.
defaultThe academy model is designed for larger schools, therefore most 
defaultprimaries do not fit the model. Th
defaulte small number of 
default schools which have converted
default, do not report much change in the working of their school , they do note that many of the services they require need to be bought back from a Local Authority in order to ensu
defaultre that they have some backup if things go wrong. This is often provided at the expense of  those schools which remain maintained as the infrastructure is often paid for out LA top slice. Collaborative groups of school could bring value for money, but it d
defaultoes not need 
defaultacademisation
default to gain this 
defaultMany primary schools currently perceive federation without academy status to offer many of the advantages of academy status without the major complexities of changing their status
default.
defaultThere has been an enormous sum of m
defaultoney spent nationally and locally in trying to oblige primary schools to become academies by a variety of means, such as bribery and coercion, this programme has resulted in only about a 10 percent success rate, with such a poor return on the investment wh
defaulten will someone question whether this is an acceptable waste of public money?
defaultThe current measures taken are support by local authorities and 
defaultby HMI, these are al
defaultready generally successful. In many cases LAs support schools to become good at their expense before being obliged to hand them over to a commercial sponsor. 
defaultNo. The recent cases where it has been revealed that the true level of investment by sponsors has been minimal or 
defaultnon existent
default, with massive profits being gained through leasing land, or buildings 
defaultback to the school 
defaultwhich have effectively been g
defaultiven to the sponsor by a Local Authority, are outrageous. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default