&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultRoy Bradshaw
default (CYS0105)
default&#xa0;
defaultCyclist for over 50 years having commuted from the suburbs into the centre of London, Birmingham and Manchester, often over 10 miles each way, as well as for leisure in 14 other countries. I have driven for over 50 years for business and pleasure 
defaultthroughout Britain as well as in several other countries.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Highway Code
defaultI have just attempted to read the current Highway Code. I was particularly interested in
defaultwhat guidance is given to motorists when overtaking cyclists, but gave up trying to find it
default.  At one time the considered safe distance when overtaking a cyclist was 6 feet, it then changed to " as much as you would allow a car",  I can't find what it is now.  Locally cars get their door mirrors broken off by passing cars so what chance do cyclis
defaultts have. Surely the Highway Code should be easy to read and without any ambiguity. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI did note the Highway Code sections 148,148,150 give several examples of what is a distraction, surely this is just padding and open to the attempted defence that an alte
defaultrnative form of distraction was not listed. The Highway Code should say - do not allow anything to distract you from driving the vehicle.
default&#xa0;
defaultCycle Lanes.
defaultThe recommended width for a cycle lane is 2 metres. There is no logical reason for an Advisory cycle lan
defaulte to be less than this as we know motorists are legally allowed to drive in an Advisory lane. What is required is a stiffening of the law that 
defaultstates any injury to a cyclist who is within an Advisory cycle lane is the responsibility of the motorist and sui
defaulttable legal action taken.
default&#xa0;
defaultLong Vehicles
defaultThere has been considerable discussion recently about the dangers of Long Vehicles much of which shows a lack of understanding of the situation. The most common advice is not to cycle on the inside of a long vehicle
default. So does this mean that in slow moving traffic on a straight road without approaching a junction the cyclist should stay behind the vehicle? If so it defeats the whole purpose of cycling in suburban areas when cycling is usually the fastest form of traffi
defaultc. Furthermore does this mean that a long vehicle will never overtake a cyclist, or if it does 
defaultdoes
default the cyclist then have to immediately dismount?
default&#xa0;
defaultMost accidents occur when the long vehicle turns. What is required is to give cyclists some prior warning. T
defaulthe normal indicators are not sufficient as the cyclists' attention is often on the road surface or other problems. If the indicators were linked to the subsidiary lights already fitted to most long vehicles along their length, being beside them at shoulder
default level this could give cyclists vital seconds warning and enable them to take avoiding action.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default