&#xa0;
defaultAFS0097defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr Ruth Boyask, Plymouth Universitydefault&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultE
defaultffectiveness of 
defaultA
defaultcademisation in 
defaultN
defaultarrowing the 
defaultG
defaultap for 
defaultD
defaultisadvantaged 
defaultC
defaulthildren
defaultEvidence from the BELMAS Structural Reform Research Programme funded study:
default‘New Relations between Local Authorities and Schools’
default&#xa0;
defaultExecutive SummarydefaultAcademisation has changed the responsibilities and functions of local authorities
default (LAs)
default in resp
defaultect of their work with schools, yet they retain significant statutory responsibility for fair access to schooling, the needs of vulnerable children, school improvement and performance, and advocacy for parents, families and children. Their ability to act u
defaultpon these responsibilities is affected by financial loss as schools convert to academies and central government cuts funding. 
defaultThe resultant climate is competitive, and in some cases, combative.
defaultThis paper reports on findings of case studies 
defaultof
default four 
defaultLAs
default wit
defaulthin one region. Three of the authorities attempted to mitigate competition within the market-led environment, whereas one embraced it. 
defaultThe findings from the project of relevance to this project are divided into two themes: 1) 
defaultStatutory responsibilities of
default LAs and reduced financial resources
default, and 2) 
defaultConfusion in functions and responsibilities
default of LAs.
defaultEven though academisation promotes school autonomy, LAs remain statutorily responsible for s
defaultome of the operations of academies, 
default(for example,
default 
defaultstatutory assessment of SEN and the prosecution of non-attendees at school
default)
default. While responsibilities for vulnerable children and many other serious concerns and issues come to the local authority, limited fi
defaultnancial and human resources can cause significant oversights. A core 
defaultfunction for the LA is 
defaultthe capacity to act 
defaulton all concerns and issues that are brought to it by stakeholders
default. 
defaultRespondents from the four case studies all reported some element of confusion in respect of their responsibilities to schools. There are responsibilities enshrined in the statutes themselves that have not changed, against which Ofsted 
defaultinspect
default local authori
defaultties, yet different messages 
defaultabout school autonomy 
defaultemerge from the Department for Education. 
defaultThese ambiguities are exacerbated when schools are transitioning to academy status, and also impact upon an LA’s capacity to offer a stable 
defaultset of
default service
defaults for cru
defaultcial functions like school improvement
default. 
defaultConclusiondefaultThis research suggests that a market economy of schooling and services to schools impacts upon local authorities’ capacity to meet the needs of disadvantaged children and young people. LAs need the financ
defaultial and human resources to respond to the issues that come to them. As inequalities within society increase, there will be greater demand placed upon LAs to respond to the needs of children.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is
default a lack of clarity around role and
default responsibility in the interactions betwee
defaultn schools and local authorities
default,
default and also 
defaultwithin 
defaultexternal relationships
default.
default While a simple solution to the ambiguit
defaulties
default may appear to be more clearly defining lines of accountability, I think there is a deeper problem 
defaultto be resolved. Current policies impacting upon the education and care of children emphasise competition, including the academies programme, forcing school
defaults and LAs to compete for custom
default and authority
default, 
defaultwork
defaulting
default against co-operati
defaulton
default or community engagement. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe expansion of the academies programme 
defaultsince 2010 has resulted in a profound reconfiguration of the responsibilities and functions of local authorities in respect of the
defaultir
default work 
defaultwith 
defaultschools. 
defaultThrough
default 
defaultThe Academies Act
default (2010)
default and 
defaultThe 
defaultSchools White Paper
default (2010) 
defaultgoverning and management bodies of academies have new responsibilities that previously had been responsib
defaultilities within
default the
default local authority
default, including 
defaultgreater school-level control over finances and expenditure
default. 
defaultYet Local 
defaultAuthorities
default (LAs)
default still retain important responsibilities in respect of schooling including:
default•
default              
defaultEnsuring there is fair access to schooling
default•
default              
defaultSupporting vulnerable children
default•
default              
defaultImproving the performance of schools and ensuring high standards  
default•
default              
defaultUsing their de
defaultmocratic mandate to advocate for parents, families and children 
default(DfE, 2010; Parish, Baxter and Sandals, 2012). 
defaultThe capacity of LAs to enact these responsibilities
default is
default affected by significant funding cuts to their formula grants (Stabe &amp; Jones, 2011), but 
defaultalso financial loss as schools convert to academies. A
defaultcademisation 
defaulthas resulted in
default pro
defaultfound
default change
defaults to
default how 
defaultLA
defaults recognise and enact responsibilities for disadvantaged children in 
defaultacademy 
defaultschools, 
defaultand
default 
defaultchanges in financing have
default also affected how local authori
defaultties relate to maintained schools. Furthermo
defaultre, the promotion of autonomous
default school
defaults has created a competitive 
defaultenvironment 
defaultthat works against the best interests of disadvantaged children, making the job of the local authority to ensure the needs of the most
default vulnerable are met much more difficult. 
defaultAn LA Senior Manager
default with strategic responsibility for services to schools 
defaultclaimed that 
defaultwithin her LA 
defaultwhere 44% of schools are academies, 
defaultrelationships between schools had become “combative”
default as a result of competition.  
defaultDifferent 
defaultLAs
default have trialled different solutions to changes in their resource, but within four 
defaultrecent 
defaultcase studies
default of LAs
default each had made immense moves away from statutory provision as a norm. Of the four 
defaultLAs
default only one fully embr
defaultaced a competitive market model to achieve its statutory responsibility to the social good, whereas the other local authorities have differently attempted to mitigate the challenges of a competitive environment so they may enact this responsibility. This h
defaultas been through the following mechanisms:
default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultHolding onto a limited statutory provision (although in light of recent funding cuts this is unlikely to continue)
default;
default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultCommunity and stakeholder engagement;
default•
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultUtilising business structures founded on principles of coope
defaultration and mutuality.
default1.1 Evidential basis of the reportdefaultThis r
defaulteport 
defaultdraws upon findings from the ‘New Relations between Local Authorities and Schools’ study to 
defaultpresent evidence 
defaultthat addresses the terms of reference of this select committee inquiry in respect of the functions and responsibilities of local authorities. The report presents findings 
defaultfrom this study 
defaultthat 
defaultaddresses 
defaultt
defaulthe functions and responsibilities in relation to acad
defaultemies and free schools of local authorities operating between the Secretary o
defaultf State and individual schools, and considers the significance of these findings for determining
default 
defaultwhat these functions
default and responsibilities should be. 
defaultThe study has focused upon four 
defaultLAs
default from within a single region looking at how their relationships with schools have changed as a result of structural reform in the schooling sector. 
defaultTabledefault. Case Studies: The Local AuthoritiesdefaultLocal Authority 1defaultLocal Authodefaultrity 2defaultLocal Authority 3defaultLocal Authority 4defaultUnitary, City
defaultUnitary, County
defaultNon-metropolitan County
defaultUnitary, Borough
defaultLabour controlled 
defaultNo overall control (majority Libdem, Ind and Con)
defaultConservative controlled
defaultConservative controlled
defaultpopulation 
default
default250000 
defaultpopulation 
default
default530000 
defaultpopulation 
default
default130000 
defaultpopulation 
default
default750000 
default108 schools
default332 schools
default58 schools
default457 schools
default&#xa0;
defaultThe studies included analysis of publicly available documentary evidence
default 
defaultabout
default the 
defaultLAs
default (including their traded services and joint ventures) 
defaultthat 
defaultincluded
default minutes of meetings, catalogues of services, 
defaultmedia reports, 
defaultnewsletters, policy documents, action plans
default amongst others
default,
default 
defaultinterviews with 
default11 
defaultsenior managers and service providers and a survey of 
defaultprimary and secondary schools with an overall response
default rate of 14%
default. 
defaultThe project was granted ethical approval at Plymouth University and follows guidelines from the British Educational Research Association.  
default2.1default&#xa0; 
default Statutorydefault defaultresponsibilities defaultof LAsdefault defaultand reduced financial resourcesdefault&#xa0;
defaultLAs report 
defaultexternal 
defaultperceptions that they are no longer responsible for schooling generally, and academy schools in particular, 
defaultwithin this environment of apparently autonomous schools 
defaulteven though they retain statutory responsibility for fairness in school access, sc
defaulthool performance, vulnerable children and advocacy for children, parents and families. 
defaultLAs reported duties that they performed for both maintained and academy schools out of their central resource, including statutory assessment of SEN and the prosecution 
defaultof non-attendees at school. 
defaultAn LA strategic manager within a considerably reduced core team
default after adopting a competitive market model of service
default 
defaultreported 
defaultthat in spite of reform 
default“…where I’m sitting it feels very much the same because all the issues and con
defaultcerns, whether they’re about academies or not, come into us.”
default 
defaultThis respondent also stressed the
default very
default important role LAs 
defaultneed to 
defaultplay in taking responsibility for excluded and vulnerable children and young people. 
defaultYet this respondent also said: 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe’ve got two children 
default[from an overseas country] 
defaultfound strapped to the bottom of a lorry…  And we've got a whole range of services now working, sorting those children o
defaultut.
default 
defaultT
defaulthey’re in foster care, getting them into school, the right support services. They’
defaultre very homesick; trying to make contact with their families. All that stuff is really important. 
defaultAnd we are doing it a bit on a shoestring I have to say at the moment default(
defaultinterview 
default11 April 2013
default, brackets 
defaultand emphasis added 
defaultby researcher
default).
default&#xa0;
defaultA
defaultn Ofsted
default report 
defaultfrom an LA inspection from the same region was
default 
defaultreleased 
defaultshortly after this interview
default,
default 
defaultraising
default 
defaultserious 
defaultconcerns about child protection services
default. It
default 
defaultclaimed
default that
default within the inspected LA
default “there are systemic weaknesses in managerial oversight and quality assurance that enable inconsistent and ineffective practice to go unchallenged and as a consequence some children and young people are exposed to unnecessary risk of significant harm”
default.
default  
defaultT
defaulthis
default was also an
default LA
default that had also adopted a fiercely competitive market model of services for children and young people
default, drawing upon the financial backing and commercial experience of a corporate partner
default. 
defaultThe more market orientated LA in my study has adopt
defaulted a position of broker between service providers and schools. The LAs who have attempted to mitigate the effects of competition because it 
defaultfragments 
defaultco-operation amongst schools or works against the interests of the most disadvantaged 
defaultremain located
default 
defaultwithi
defaultn market relations. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe solution
defaults
default 
defaultfor survival within a market economy of services to schools for
default 
defaultall the case study
default LA
defaults
default has been 
defaultthe
default disestablish
defaultment of
default 
defaultprovision
default within the LA
default, and move towards commissioning model
defaults to fulfil statutory duties
default. 
defaultThe model
default within one of the LAs 
defaultaimed
default predominantly 
defaultto 
defaultcommission services 
defaultfor disadvantaged children and young people 
defaultfrom school
default providers
default. The other three
default LAs had developed some form of traded service
default based upon their disestablished statutory service provision
default, in one case retaining a 20% interest in a joint venture established in partnership with a large corporate backer, and in the two other cases developing business units within the local authority. 
defaultService provision as a core function of the LAs is almost n
defaulton-existent, and the traded services are offered to both maintained and academy schools.
default This le
defaultaves
default LAs trying to account for differences in their commitments to maintained schools compared with academies. In many cases there remains little difference.
default 
defaultYe
defaultt some LA responde
defaultnts argue there is a difference
default in quality of service between statutory and traded provision. 
defaultA respondent who at the time of interview retained a position within a small 
defaultstatutory provision 
defaultunit within
default an
default LA
default 
defaultunder threat of becoming a fu
defaultlly traded service 
defaultsaid
default:
default&#xa0;
defaultIt’s not a foregone conclusion that commissioning
default out and putting things to arm’s length
default will diminish the service, but I think there is a fear that it could
default…
defaultCertainly in practical terms, I can see that if I and my colleagues are 
defaultcommissioned out, then a lot of the stuff that just lands on your desk on a day-to-day basis I’m really concerned about who will do that?  If I’m commissioned to do specific things I will do those specific things, I will become a traded service. Who will p
defaultick up all the little incidental things which if they’re not picked up sometimes become huge things.  Personally I have fears about that, and I know that most of the colleagues I work closely with have fears about that as well
default…
defaultwe are really genuinely worri
defaulted about it in terms of the service that the schools, families and children will be receiving
default (Interview 16 May 2013)
default.
default&#xa0;
default2.2default&#xa0; 
defaultConfusion in functions and responsibilitiesdefault of LAsdefaultRespondents from the four case studies all reported some element of confusion in respect of their responsibilities to schools. There are responsibilities enshri
defaultned in the statutes themselves
default that have not changed, against which Ofsted intend inspecting loc
defaultal authorities, 
defaultyet
default different messages 
defaultemerge
default from the Department for Education. 
default…We’ve got Sir Michael Wilshaw in Ofsted saying, “We’re going to inspect the local authorities and you are responsible for outcomes for all children, even if it’s in academie
defaults and free schools; it’s down to you to sort out how you negotiate that space with the academies”. We’ve got the DfE saying, “Actually schools are autonomous, they’re out of local authority control” (interview 11 April 2013).
defaultThis
default ambiguity
default has practical i
defaultmplications for 
defaultLAs when 
defaultrationalising services and
default managing
default their costs. For example, when discussing statutory provision of Governor Services in one case study LA I was told:  
defaultWe looked into this quite carefully and in fact we asked our legal department
default to look into exactly what the Local Authority was obliged to provide but it was not easy to discern. In the end the Local Authority believes that the induction training that we are providing for new Governors and new Chairs of Governors is something that 
defaultwe are obliged to provide (interview 16 April 2013).
defaultFor the main part,
default 
defaultthe case study 
defaultLAs seem to be minimising commitments to statutory provision
default,
default particularly in respect of academies
default. 
default 
defaultHowever, they are still engaged in a transitional situation. One res
defaultpondent drew attention to differences between sponsored and converter academies in relation to her LA’s responsibility for school improvement. She pointed out that the LA was likely to be already working with schools who were becoming sponsored academies, 
defaultand that the LA was taking the lead in supporting the conversion process. 
defaultT
defaulthe sponsor in my view should be wholly involved in the period up until conversion, and my experience is that they’re quite reluctant to do that.  Obviously they will do the TUPE
default a
defaultnd the statutory stuff that has to be done to keep the processes moving along, but in terms of school improvement, particularly in trying to raise achievement or trying to improve the quality of teaching, it’s quite difficult to get them involved until the
default actual co
defaultnversion date has taken place. 
defaultThat I don’t think is in the best interests of the school. 
default(Interview 16 May 2013)
defaultThis situation is further complicated because the sponsored academies are generally in a position where they are being ‘forced’ to c
defaultonvert. Schools dislike this situation, and so it seems do the LAs in my case studies. 
defaultWe’re pretty consistent there because one of the things that I don’t think anyone is comfortable with is this whole concept of forced academies. And we’ve had quite int
defaulteresting exchanges with the DfE about this, because they’ve come down with a hit list of schools and say, right this where you’ve g
defaultot to do this. I think issuing 
defaultwarning notices and things
default…
defaultBut our principle has always been that if a school is going to convert, unless it’s absolutely failing and it’s on its knees – and we don’t have schools like that in 
default[this LA]
default at the moment – then it’s something you negotiate with the governors. 
default(interview
default 11 April 2013)
defaultFurthermore, 
defaulta
default respondent suggested that sponsored
default ac
defaultademies were a threat to the LA
default maintaining a school improvement service, even as a traded service since “the more schools that are forced academies, I think they are less likely to buy b
defaultack because if you are a sponsored academy you will have your budget top-sliced by your sponsor for school improvement, so why would you then find another pot of money to buy local authority school improvement?” 
default(Interview 16 May 2013)
default3default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultConclusionsdefaultThe LAs 
defaultreported in this study recognise their statutory responsibilities for disadvantaged children. However, recent structural reforms are impacting in various ways on their capacity to act upon these responsibilities. This research suggests that 
defaulta market econom
defaulty of schooling and services to schools impacts upon local authorities’ capacity to meet the needs of disadvantaged children and young people. LAs need the financial and human resources to respond to the issues that come to them. As inequalities within soci
defaultety increase, there will be greater demand placed upon LAs
default to respond to the needs of children.  
default&#xa0;
defaultT
defaulthe 
defaultreported study i
defaultndicates that there remains a considerable lack of clarity around role and
default responsibility 
defaultin the interactions between 
defaultschools and local 
defaultauthorities
default 
defaultand also through external relations
defaulthips
default with governmental bodies such as Ofsted. While a simple solution to
default the
default ambiguity may appear to be more clearly de
defaultfining lines of accountability, 
defaultI 
defaultthink
default there is a deeper problem to be resolved
default. Current 
defaultpolicies impacting upon the education and care of children emphasise competition, including the academies programme, forcing schools and
default LAs to compete for custom
default. While three of the four case studies reported upon in this paper are attempting to mitigate 
defaultthe
default competitive 
defaultconditions, the evidence suggests that external pressures such as funding and central accountability 
defaultare 
defaultwork
defaulting
default against
default their attempts at
default co-operati
defaulton
default or
default supporting
default community 
defaultengagement
default (see Boyask, forthcoming for a more detailed account 
defaultof the research findings and conclusions)
default. 
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
defaultReferences: defaultBoyask, R. (forthcoming) 
defaultIllustrations of new relationships between local authorities and schools
default, BELMAS
defaultDepartment for Education (DfE) (2010) The
default Importance of Teaching: The Schools White Paper 2010, London: The Stationery Office. 
defaultParish N., Baxter, A. and Sandals, L. (2012) Action research into the evolving role of the local authority in education, The final report for the Ministerial Advisory Gr
defaultoup, DfE. (Research Report DFE - RR224). London: DfE.
defaultStabe &amp; Jones (22 March 2011) Council cuts: UK local authorities respond to budget cuts, 
defaultFinancial Times
default, Retrieved 15 May 2012: http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/f11f1a48-40d3-11e0-9a37-00144feabdc0.html
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default The bibliographic details of this report have been left out 
defaultto help maintain confidentiality of the research participants by obscuring the region.  
default 
defaultTransfer of Undertakings (Protectio
defaultn of Employment
default) Regulations 2006.
default