&#xa0;
default              defaultWritten evidence submitted by the UK Environmental Law Association (ESG 38) defaultSummarydefault&#xa0;defaultIntroductiondefault&#xa0;
defaultOverview of the SituationdefaultFor example
default,
default on 12 August 2013, the Prime Minister, David Cameron, stated 
defaultin the Telegraph
default newspaper
default 
defaultthat he thought fracking should receive public support
default.
default  
defaultFurthe
defaultrmore, HM Treasury in its report 
defaultInvesting on Britain’s Future 
default(Command 8669,June 2013) indicated that 
defaultshale gas exploitation is important in relation to Britain’s future pro
defaults
defaultperity and that the Government is likely to support the process, partly through 
defaulta
default target of 
defaultthe Environment Agency being able to issue permits by February 2014 within 1-2 weeks of receipt. 
defaultThe Legal and Regulatory Processesdefault(i)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe 
defaultadequacy 
defaultof the current legal regime.
defaultFracking is a controversial 
defaultprocess
default as far as the general public is concerned
default.  Consequently,
default 
defaultsimpler, more streamlined 
defaultand overt 
defaultregulation could provide the public with the reassurances it needs and thus be welcomed by industry.  
defaultThere is no overall control of the process as a variety of public sector organisations
default and regulators
default are involved and/or consulted at various stages. 
defaultThe
default regulatory process in Wales is complex, partly due to the fact that development of major energy projects is not a devolved function
default.  As a result,
default licenses for
default the 
default exploration and development (Petroleum Exploration and Development Licences – PEDLs) of sh
defaultale gas resources are granted by the UK Government’s Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC).  
defaultThere are numerous pieces of legislation and regulation relevant to obtaining overall permission to explore and exploit shale gas resources
default.  These 
defaultcover 
defaulttown and country planning; water resources; environmental permitting; hazardous waste; design and construction of wells; operation of borehole sites; dangerous substances and explosive atmospheres; use of works equipment; and mineral mining. 
default 
defaultApart from ob
defaulttaining 
defaultPEDLs 
defaultfrom DECC for testing for 
defaultand extraction of methane gas from shale rock, p
defaultlanning permission has to be granted by local planning authorities
default.
default  Natural Resources Wales and the Health and Safety Executive are 
defaultalso 
defaultconsulted
default,
default 
defaultnotified 
defaultand involv
defaulted 
defaultduring the processes.  The former is concerned with pollution control
default and
default is served notices of the proposed development
default, determines
default and issues abstraction licences and discharge 
defaultconsents
default (and possibly flare emission permits)
default, whilst the latter has to agree the drilling activity.  
defaultThe agreement of 
defaultboth 
defaultlandowners on the site concerned 
defaultand
default adjacent landowners has to be obtained and, i
defaultf coal seams a
defaultre affected, which is the case in
default many potential areas of Wales, the Coal Authori
defaultty will 
defaultneed to 
defaultbe 
defaultconsulted.
default  
defaultThis complex
default, multi-layered
default 
defaultagency process
default 
defaultinvolves 
defaulta number of risks, such as the potential for communication failures; the loss of opportunity to develop wide expertise 
defaultin
default fracking, and its environmental and other impacts; 
defaultthe lengthy and complex 
defaultdecision making 
defaultprocess acting as a barrier to industry development
default; and confusion amongst the public 
defaultabout
default where responsibility lies and how they can engage with the process of granting approvals and permissions.  
defaultA
defaultlthough the UK p
defaultrocess is more robust than that in the US, there are concerns about whether it is 
defaultfit for purpose and sufficiently 
defaultrobust 
defaultto ensure environmental 
defaultand community 
defaultimpacts are minimised
default.
default 
default   
default(ii)
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe 
defaultresourcing 
defaultof the regulators and the trans
defaultparency of the approval
default process
defaultThe adequate resourcing of NRW
default,
default as the lead regulator 
defaultin Wales, 
defaultin terms of manpower and the necessary expertise
default,
default will be essential 
defaultin providing potential developers with the confidence to explore and possibly exploit resources in Wales.
default  
defaultRegulation is only as good as the resources available for
default setting appropriate permitting conditions and ensuring their subsequent
default enforcement.  
defaultIt is, therefore, important that 
defaultNRW regulatory staff 
defaultpossess 
defaultthe necessary background experience to manage the processes of 
defaultfracking 
defaulteffectively
default.  
defaultFor the reasons given
default 
defaultabove, the fact that the process
defaultes
default 
defaultfor 
defaultgranting permission
defaults
default for exploration and extraction 
defaultof shale gas 
defaultare so complex 
default(
defaultinvolv
defaulting
default the application o
defaultf a number of 
defaultregulatory regimes)
default poses significant obstacles to the development and regulation of this sector
default,
default and presents 
defaultdifficulties for the public in terms of hav
defaulting
default a clear
default and 
defaultjoined up understanding of the overall process. 
default   
defaultConclusiondefault12.
defaultT
defaulthe
default technology is evolving and major energy companies, such as Centrica, are now investing in this area. 
default 
defaultExploitation of shale gas seems to have the potential benefit of bring
defaulting greater security of energy supplies
default,
default although there is no definitive assessment of the extent of exploitable shale gas reserves in Wales. 
default 
defaultM
defaultore research is needed
default, therefore,
default and the regulators need to keep up to date with developments
default,
default as well as playing a
defaultn 
defaultactive role with the industry, policy developers and the research community
default.
default13.  T
defaulthe 
defaultexploitation of 
defaultshale gas 
defaultmay have 
defaultthe capacity to
default contribute to the Welsh economy
default, but t
defaulthere is still a considerable amount of technical, politica
defaultl, economic
default, regulatory
default and environmental work to be done before it can be relied upon as an economically viable energy source 
defaultthat
default can be 
defaultexploit
defaulted
default in a sustainable way.
default  In particular
default,
default 
defaultthe legal processes 
defaultthat apply to 
defaultthe process of 
defaultfracking need to be 
defaultconsolidated
default and simplified.  The current system i
defaults
default complex requiring permissions and consents from a number of different 
defaultregulatory 
defaultbodies
default.  
defaultAccordingly, it is essential that regulators have adequate resources to maintain and develop expertise in, and exp
defaulterience of, managing the risks to the public and the environment that arise from exploration and exploitation of Wales’s shale gas reserves. 
default1
default9
default December 2013
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default