&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by John Christy (IPC0055)default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultI am John R. Christy, 
defaultDistinguished 
defaultProfessor of Atmospheric Science, Alabama’s State Climatologist and Director of the Earth System Science Center at The University of Alabama in Huntsville.  I h
defaultave served as a Lead Author, 
defaultContributing Author
default and Reviewer
default of IPCC assessments,
default have been awarded NASA’s Medal for Exceptional Scientific Achievement, and in 2002 
defaultwas 
defaultelected a Fellow of the American Meteorological Society.  
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is a privil
defaultege for me to offer my views on the relationship between climate and weather 
defaultbased on my exper
defaultience as a climate scientist.  My research area might be best described as building datasets from scratch to advance our understanding of what the climate is doing and why. I have used traditional surface observations as well as measurements from balloons 
defaultand satellites to document the climate story.  Many of my datasets are used to test hypotheses of climate variability and change.  
default&#xa0;
defaultExtremedefault Eventdefaultsdefault&#xa0;
defaultAs the glob
defaultal temperature failed to warm over
default the past 15 years, it became popular to 
defaultdraw
default attention to the
default occurrence of 
defaultextreme weather 
defaultevents
default as worrisome 
defaultconsequences
default of 
defaultpostulated climate change due to 
defaultincreasing concentrations of greenhouse gases
default.  For example, m
defaultany claims have been made that 
defaultweather
default events of the past 50 years are 
default“
defaultunprecedented
default”
default, theref
defaultore must be caused by human influences
default.  However, o
defaultne can only
default establish 
defaultsuch events as 
defaultstatistically 
defaultunusual
default, a lower standard than 
default“
defaultunprecedented,
default”
default if 
defaulta minimum of
default 30 or more
default such periods with consistent data
default are available
default.  This means
default we need 1500 to 2000 years
default of information
default 
defaultwith which to compare our recent 50-years 
defaultof history 
defaultto determine whether any characteristic is 
defaulttruly 
defaultunusual
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultFor a few parameters we have such data.  Severe drought leaves a clear 
defaultmark
default on the 
defaultlandscape so th
defaultat
default we know our nation experienced droughts in the 12
defaultth
default century, the so-called mega
default-
defaultdroughts, which were much worse than any we’ve seen in the past century.
default  Thus, droughts of the past 50 years are not unusual 
defaultand obviously not 
default“
defaultunprecedented
default”
default as shown next
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultCaliforniadefaultAt right are photos from Lindstrom (1990) 
defaultof divers examining 
defaulttrees 
defaultwhich 
defaultgrew on dry ground around 900 years ago in what is now a Sierra Nevada alpine lake.  This indicates that a drastic but natural change to a much drier climate 
defaultoccurred a
defaultnd must
default have lasted for at least 
default50 years
default for trees to have grown to these sizes
default on dry ground.
default&#xa0;defaultRocky MountainsdefaultA 500-year history of moisture in the upper Colorado River basin (
defaultbelow
default) indicates the past century was quite moist while major multi-decadal droughts occurred in all four prior centuries (Piechota et al. 2004.)  Indeed, the conclusion of Piechota et al. states that after examining the paleo-record, the present-day droughts “
defaultcould be worse.” These and other evidences point to the real probability that water supply in the West will 
defaultsee declines simply as a matter of the natural variability of climate
default.  
default&#xa0;defaultGreat PlainsdefaultIn the Great Plains, the period from 3000 to 1500 
defaultyears ago
default saw a drier and warmer climate during which a significant parabolic sand dune ecosystem developed, especially in western Nebraska and NE Colorado (Muhs 1985).
default  In other words, 
defaultparts of 
defaultthe Great Plains resembled a desert.
default  Many of these areas experienced 
defaultdune “reactivation” during Medieval times (900-1300 AD).  The
defaultn, the
default climate moistened and cooled 
defaultbeginning around
default 1300 AD to support the short-grass prairie seen today, though “reactivation” is possible at any time (Schmeisser, 2009).  Indeed, Muhs and Hol
defaultliday (1995) found that dune reactivation can occur within decadal time scales from extended drought by examining the Great Plains environmen
defaultt of only the past 150 years. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWith the massive use of ground water for irrigation, the High Plains Aquifer has d
defaulteclined an average of 12.8 ft, with some areas in the Texas panhandle down over 150 ft.   The key point here is that the Plains is subject to 
defaultnatural (and sobering) 
defaultlong-term droughts that would very likely tax the current water management system (ground-w
defaultater withdrawals) while not replenishing the aquifer, producing a situation of reduced agricultural productivity, especially in its southern reaches.
default&#xa0;
defaultU.S. defaultDaily High Temperature RecordsdefaultAre daily high temperature extremes becoming more frequent?  To answe
defaultr such a question, one must obviously consider datasets that span an appropriate length of time.  If one 
defaultdoes
default the analysis 
defaultwith
default stations 
defaultof
default at least 80 years of data, and determines the number of daily temperature records by year that stand as of 31 Dec 20
default12, the answer to the question is 
default“
defaultno.
default”
default  It is true that the number of records in 2012 was quite high, thanks to a very warm March and a hot Mid-Western summer.  However in comparison to the heat waves of the 1930s, the summer was not the “worst” for heat.
default  
default2012 finished in 8
defaultth
default place on the list, just below 
default6
defaultth
default and 7
defaultth
default places
default by a few days.
default  Imagine what this diagram would show if we had 1000 years of climate data in which it 
defaultwould be 
defaultcertainly likely that many years experienced more record warmth than even
default the 1930s.
default&#xa0;
defaultRecent defaultTornadoesdefaultThe image to the right from NOAA indicates we are in a very low
default 
defaulttornado period in our count
defaultr
defaulty – in fact the current year (
defaultright, 
defaultblack line) is the lowest year-to-date (
defaultNov
default.) value in the 60-year history.  This of course is 
defaultnot a prediction that tornadoes will decline in the future nor that there will be few tornadoes the rest of this year.  It is simply a recognition that the number of tornadoes can vary significantly from year to year and there is no long term trend (
defaulthttp://www.spc.noaa.gov/wcm/adj.html
default)
default&#xa0;
defaultRecent Wildfiresdefault&#xa0;
defaultWildfires are a natural 
defaultconsequence
default of the U.S. climate
default variability
default and a feature to which many components of the natural ecosystem have found ways 
defaultfor
default advantage-
defaulttaking
default.  Nowadays however, our fire su
defaultppression activities that allow
default 
defaulte
defaultxcessive buildup of fuel combined with the careless or premeditated human character of some folks, gives greater opportunity for wildfires to 
defaultbe started
default and to destroy.  The 
defaultcurrent year has included the 
defaulthuge
default Rim Fire in the central Sierra Nevada of California, but
default,
default on the whole
default,
default the year is well below average
default as shown in the graphic to the 
defaultabove
default (data from the National Interagency Fire Center 
defaulthttp://www.nifc.gov/fireInfo/fireInfo_stats_totalFires.html
default)
default.
default  A related metric is total snowfall in the Sierra
default of California
default which has 
defaultalso 
defaultshown no trend since the Southern Pacific Railroad Company began measuri
defaultng snowfall in 1878 (Christy 2012).
defaultWest defaultAntarctica defaultCoastaldefault Temperaturesdefault&#xa0;defaultTemperatures over the vast expanse of the Antarctic continent have not shown significant warming in the past several decades.  Indeed satellite-based observations of the 
defaultatmospheric temperature above Antarctica show a slight decline since 1979.  However, m
defaulteasurements along the coast of West Antarctic 
defaultand its 
defaultPeninsula have warmed in recent years.  Thomas et al. (2013) have reconstructed 308 years of temperature variations (1702-2009) through stable isotopes and confirmed the recent warming.  They found that
default,
default&#xa0;
default… this warming trend is not unique.  More dramatic isotopic warming (and cooling) trends occurred in the mid-nineteenth and eighteenth centuries suggesting that at present, the effect of anthropogenic climate drivers at this location has not exceeded 
defaultthe natural range of climate variability in the context of the past ~300 years.
default&#xa0;
defaultHere we have another example that indicates we must have hundreds of years of
default climate records 
defaultbefore 
defaulttrying to assess 
defaultwhether 
defaultrecent changes
default are unusual
default.  In this case, the te
defaultmperatures of West Antarc
defaulttica have experienced similar and likely 
defaultgreater changes
default than recently observed
default in merely the las
defaultt 300 years, a period before which humans could have affected the climate.
default&#xa0;defaultWhat does Extreme Weather defaultreally tell usdefault?default&#xa0;defaultThe point about
default our 
defaultlack of 
defaultunderstanding 
defaultof t
defaulthe causes of ext
defaultreme weather was summed up in
default an
default article in 
defaultNature
default magazine with the title “Extreme Weather – Better models are needed before exceptional events can be reliably linked to global warming” (
defaultNature
default, 20 September 
default2012, vol 489, pg 335-6.) The emphasis in the article agrees with my statement that our level of understanding about the climate system is so low that we cannot predict nor attribute unusual events to human emissions of greenhouse gases
default using models and/or
default limited data records
default.  The article discusses the problem that current climate models are not “fit to inform legal and societal decisions” without further “enormous research” because at present they are not ready for such tasks.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe article notes that ext
defaultreme events “have complex causes, involving anomalies in atmospheric circulation, levels of soil moisture and the like.”  The comments of one scientist at a recent workshop on the topic indicated “the coarse and mathematically far-from-perfect climate mode
defaultls used to generate attribution claims … are unjustifiably speculative, basically unverifiable and better not made at all.”  Not all participants felt this way, however 
defaultNature
default reported that, “None of the industry and government experts at the workshop coul
defaultd think of any concrete example in which an attribution might inform business or political decision-making.”  In other words, industry and government would prefer an accurate forecast over the notion of attributing that forecast to a particular cause.  Unf
defaultortunately, the ability to make accurate
default long-range forecasts is not here yet
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the examples above, we don’t see increases in extreme events (which is also true for tornadoes, hurricanes, floods, etc. - see my House testimony of 31 March 2011) but we mu
defaultst certainly be ready for more to come as part of nature’s variability. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI am not using 
defaultthe examples above
default to prove the weather in the US is becoming less extreme.  My point is that extreme events are poor metrics to use for detecting climate 
defaultchange.  In
defaultdeed, because of their rarity (by definition) using extreme events to bolster a claim about any type of climate change (warming or cooling) runs the risk of setting up the classic “non-falsifiable hypothesis.”    For example, we were told by the IPCC that 
default“milder winter temperatures will decrease heavy snowstorms” (TAR WG2, 15.2.4.1.2.4).  After the winters of 2009-10 and 2010-11, we are told the opposite by advocates of the IPCC position, “Climate Change Makes Major Snowstorms More Likely” (
defaulthttp://www.ucsusa.org/news/press_release/climate-change-makes-snowstorms-more-likely-0506.html
default).
default&#xa0;
defaultThe non-falsifiable hypotheses can be stated this way, 
default“whatever happens is consistent with my hypothesis.”  In other words, there is no event that would “falsify” the hypothesis.  As such, these assertions cannot be considered science
default,
default or in anyway informative
default,
default since the hypothesis’ fundamental prediction is 
default“anything 
defaultcan
default happen.”  In the example above if winters become milder or they become snowier, the non-falsifiable hypothesis stands.  This is not science.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are innumerable types of events that can be defined as extreme events – so for the enterprisin
defaultg individual (unencumbered by the scientific method), weather statistics can supply an unlimited, target-rich environment in which to discover a “useful” extreme event. Thus, when the enterprising individual observes an unusual weather event, it may be tem
defaultpting to define it as a once-for-all extreme metric to “prove” a point about climate change – even if the event was measured at a station with only 30 years of record. Extreme events happen, and their causes are intricately tied to the semi-unstable dynami
defaultcal situations that can occur out of an environment of natural, unforced variability.
default  In other words, Mother Nature ha
defaults within her all the necessary tools
default to generate extreme events that exceed what we’ve seen in the past 50 years.
default&#xa0;
defaultScience checks hypothe
defaultses (assertions) by testing specific, falsifiable predictions implied by those hypotheses.  The predictions are to be made in a manner that, as much as possible, is blind to the data against which they are evaluated.  It is the testable predictions from
default a 
defaultspecific set of
default hypotheses, 
defaultotherwise known as
default 
defaultclimate model
default simulation
defaults
default, that run into trouble as shown 
defaultbelow
default.  Before going on to that test, the main point here is that extreme events do not lend themselves as being rigorous metrics for 
defaultconvicting
default human 
defaultCO2 emissions of being guilty of causing them.
default&#xa0;
defaultUtility of Climate Modelsdefault&#xa0;
defaultIn the f
defaultigure
default below
default 
defaultI provide the 35-
defaultyear record 
default(1979-2013) 
defaultof 
defaultatmospheric temperature in the tropics – the key region in which climate models respond to greenhouse gas warming wit
defaulth a large and distinct signal. 
default The focus on the tropics is important because 
defaultof the consistent and significant warming that climate models indicate should have already occurred as a result of the increasing concentration of greenhouse gases w
defaulte have put i
defaultnto the atmosphere. 
default  
defaultIt also represents a part of the global atmosphere in which the critical water vapor and cloud feedbacks have major influences.
default  In addition, changes in this region were determined by the EPA to be a 
defaultkey line of evidence of
default greenhouse-gas caused climate change.  Finally, t
defaulthe tropical atmosphere is also a huge and easy target for modeling projects to hit if the physics are well represented.  
defaultSince this warming should have taken place already, this provides for us a way to tes
defaultt the model simulations.
default There are 102 model runs represented in the figure, but I have organized them by the 
default24 types of models
default.  The thick red line is the average of the 24 groups.  Thin, solid lines are the six model groupings created by U.S. institutio
defaultns and the dotted 
defaultlines 
defaultby those 
defaultfrom 
defaultoutside the U.S.  The observations are provided by six independent 
defaultsources
default, 
defaultwith “balloons” being the average of the 
defaultfour balloon-borne 
defaultdatasets
default and 
default“satellites” the average of the two 
defaultgroups which utilize satellite in
defaultstrumentation.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe comparison
default shows 
defaultt
defaulthat the very latest climate model simulations 
defaultused in the IPCC Assessment released two 
defaultmonths
default ago 
defaultindicate that their response to CO2 on average is 2 to 
default5
default times greater than reality. 
default  In strict statistical testing, we can say that the m
defaultodels on average failed a simple
default hypothesis test 
defaultto check whether they could represent
default the path the real world took on tropical 
defaultatmospheric 
defaulttemperatures
default (see Douglass et
default al. 2007, McKitrick et al. 2010,
default 2011
default, Douglass and Christy 2013)
default.
default&#xa0;defaultAn 
defaultextremely important
default paper was published in 
defaultNature Climate Change
default this past spring as one of the first 
defaultstudies 
defaultto actually perform a test of model capabilities 
defaultin a controlled experiment to
default understand the impacts on the critical processes that affect the way 
defaultthe temperature will change
default (Stephens and Bony, 2013)
default.  They simply ran 
defaultfour major climate models
default 
defaultover
default an ocean-covered earth (i.e. a very simple earth) with the current ocean temperatur
defaultes, then again with elevated ocean temperatures.  The experiment would then reveal the impact of the extra warmth on the way the climate system operates
default, especially, clouds and rain because they have significant impacts on the warming processes. So, gettin
defaultg 
defaultclouds and rain
default correct is necessary for long-term integrations. 
defaultTo their surprise, the four major models gave quite different results
default (figure above)
default, both in terms of
default the
default magnitude 
defaultand of the sign
default of the change in clouds 
defaultand
default rain as shown in the figure.
default 
defaultThis is exactly the type of fundamental, rigorous evaluation that must be encouraged for other parts of the modeling enterprise.  One can only conclude that at least three of the four models fail (if on the
default odd
default ch
defaultance o
defaultne is correct) to depict
default the
default fundame
defaultntal 
defaultprocess
defaultes
default of the Earth system.  This result supports the comments in the paragraphs above which demonstrate the climate modeling enterprise must go “
defaultback to the
default basics” as stated in Stephens and Bony.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn a paper published last week
default, 
defaultSwanson (2013) ex
defaultamined the previous generation of climate models used in the IPCC AR4 (
default2007, 
defaultknown as CMIP3) in comparison with the latest generation of models employed in the current IPCC AR5 (known as CMIP5 models as I used earlier).  Swanson found that the newer CMIP5 
defaultmodels were worse at depicting actual climate 
defaultvariations 
defaultthan the older CMIP3 versions.  He suggests that the modelers have a “selection bias based on warming rate” that attempts to replicate the rapid warming of the Arctic (a small region) while becoming 
defaultworse (too warm) in the much more vast tropics and southern hemisphere.
default  He argues for a “healthy dose
default of diversity” to be reintroduced into the climate simulation enterprise.
default&#xa0;
defaultBasing scientific conclusions about climate change 
default(
defaultor 
defaultbasing 
defaultpolicy decisions 
defaultabout energy
default)
default on 
defaultclimate 
defaultmodel output is risky given the 
defaultinability of
default model simulations 
defaultto reproduce the real
default world – and their results are not getting better.
default&#xa0;defaultThe IPCC Summary for Policy Makersdefault&#xa0;
defaultRegarding the IPCC, please note that the IPCC was written by IPCC-selected scientists and that the document represents their opinions.  Many of the conclusions are fine but some of the key ones do not represent the views of 
defaultmany in 
defaultthe broader climate comm
defaultunity.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThe head
defaultline statement from the
default 2013
default 
defaultSummary for Policy Makers
default baffles me.  It reads,
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is extremely likely that human influence has been the dominant cause of the observed warming since the mid-20
defaultth
default century.
default&#xa0;
defaultFirst, the IPCC 
defaultrelies on
default climate 
defaultmodels to distinguish “natural” from “human” caused climate change because instruments can’t.  However, as demonstrated, these same models on average fail 
defaultby a significant amount 
defaultto reproduce the climate of the past 35 years
default (the years most directly impact
defaulted by rising greenhouse gas emissions
default.
default)
default  But in conclusion, the IPCC now has
default even
default more confidence that the models can distinguish “natural” from 
default“human” change
default 
defaultover a period the models clearly fail to simulate well
default.  It doesn’t make sense to me.  
default&#xa0;
defaultNow, i
defaultt
default is true that 
defaultin the models
default, most of the warming in the past 50 years is due to greenhouse gases, but since the model-based warming did not occur in reality (by a significant amount), how can one claim that reality was driven by greenhouse gas warming?
default&#xa0;
defaultI 
defaultsee two things here, (1) 
defaultthe
default need to go back to the drawing board on climate modeling 
defaultwith special attention to the causes of natural variations and 
defaultwith a rigorously independent 
defaultvalidation
default program
default (i.e. a
default set of relatively inexpensive but
default true “
defaultRed Teamdefaultsdefault”)
default, and (2) the world community needs to be exposed to the real debates in climate science rather than statements amounting to a consensus of those who already agree with a
default certain
default consensus.
default  These are sentiments I have been advocating for years
default in congre
defaultssional testimony
default and
default which
default appear in an article published in 
defaultNature
default magazine (Christy, 
default2010
default see after references
default).
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, 
defaultI direct 
defaultthe reader
default to 
defaulta supplement attached
default to 
defaultthis
default written testimony by Professor Judith Curry of Georgia Tech entitled, “IPCC Diagnosis – Permanent Paradigm Paralysis.”
default  The title is an apt description of where the IPCC process has gone.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeventeen Years Ago – House Committee on Sciencedefault&#xa0;
defaultSeventeen years 
defaultago, in March 1996, I testified before this committee 
defaultregarding
default climate change. In that testimony I reported on the development of the deep layer 
defaultatmospheric 
defaulttemperature datasets 
defaultfrom satellites 
defaultthat Roy Spencer, then of NASA
default now of UAHuntsville
default, and I had
default pioneered.  Using these data
default,
default Richard McNider, also of UAHuntsville, and I wrote a paper in 
defaultNature
default magazine that indicated climate model simulations were warming the planet about 4 times faster than in reality (Christy and McNider 1994).
default&#xa0;
default Further analysis
default confirmed a
default rate in models
default 2 to 4 times 
defaultfaster than the
default real world
default.  
default&#xa0;
defaultIt was clear at the time, and agreed to by 
defaultnearly everyone
default, that our understanding
default of how the climate system worked
default was poor and much more research was needed on observing the climate and on understanding its natural variations.
default&#xa0;
default I also noted that we should expect weather extremes 
defaultto continue 
defaultbecause that has been the nature of climate from the beginning. 
defaultOne of my c
defaultoncludin
defaultg statements was, and I quote, 
default&#xa0;
defaultWithout a continuing program of research that places climate variations in proper perspective
default 
default[i.e. 
defaultnatural climate variations
default]
default and reports with improving confidence on their causes, we will be vulnerable to calls f
defaultor knee-jerk remedies to combat "climate change," which likely will be unproduc
defaulttive and economically damaging.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultNow here we are, over 17 years later.  It appears the nation has indeed enacted “knee-jerk” remedies to 
default“combat climate change”
default through regulat
defaultions on carbon dioxide.  I warned
default this committee
default in 1996 that these would be “unproductive and economically damaging.” I have since provided testimony that demonstrates that these regulations will be “unproductive” regarding their impact on climate.  I wil
defaultl leave it to economists to determine whether the regulations
default which result in higher energy prices
default are also “economically damaging”, especially for the poorest among us.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe nation did 
defaultindeed 
defaultsupport
default some
default efforts to 
defaultimprove the
default 
defaultclimate 
defaultobserv
defaulting
default system, e
defaultspecially from space, 
defaultto help in determining
default 
defaultwhat 
defaultwas happening with the climate, and then begin to understand 
defaultwhy
default changes are taking place.  Other efforts seem to be falling by the wayside
default,
default including attention to the network of high quality surface monito
defaultring stations
default such as NOAA’s Regional Climate Reference Network
default.  Simply put, we need to know 
defaultwhat
default the climate 
defaulti
defaults doing before claiming to know 
defaultwhy
default it 
defaultis doing what it i
defaults doing
default.  W
defaultithout 
defaultaccurate 
defaultobservations we 
defaultcan
default not know 
defaultwhat
default the climate is doing
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is 
defaultenlightening
default to examine the
default 35-
defaultyear comparison of models and observations of atmospheric temperature in the tropics – the key region in which climate models respond to greenhouse gas warming with a large and distinct signal
default and a region promoted by t
defaulthe EPA as a fingerprint of human-induced climate change
default.
default  This is an exceptionally large target for climate models to aim at, and it incorporates the critical water vapor and cloud feedbacks about which we know so little.   The current
default record is now twice 
defaultas long as was available when I testified in 1996 and the models are more complicate
defaultd, expensive and numerous
default,
default 
defaultrepresenting
default an industry unto itself
default.  The comparison
default 
defaultshows that the very latest climate models’
default 
defaulttropical 
defaultresponse to CO2
default,
default on average
default,
default is still 2
default to 
default5
default times greater than reality
default,
default 
defaultjust 
defaultas 
defaultit was
default in 1996. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI believe we missed a tremendous opportunity 
default17 years ago
default to develop a better understanding 
defaultof the climate system 
defaultbecause
default research dollars
default were directed
default to
default 
defaultestablish
default a climate
default modeling industry
default.
default  
defaultTo 
defaultcompound the problem
default as it developed
default, I believe
default we
default failed to
default fund substantial projects to
default examine the output of climate models in an independent, objective and method
defaultological
default 
defaultway, i.e. 
defaultwe did not establish “red teams”
default to rigorously study the output of m
defaultodels on which the most expensive of regulations 
defaultnow 
defaultrely.
default 
default 
defaultThis 
defaulthas left us 
default17 years later 
defaultstill wondering
default 
defaultwhat porti
defaulton of th
defaulte 
defaultrecent modest 
defaultchange
default 
defaultis
default natural and what portion might be
default human-caused.
default&#xa0;
defaultConclusiondefault&#xa0;
defaultIn this testimony,
default evidence is presented to demonstrate that recent weather events are not outside the extremes that have occurred in the past 
defaultwhen human influences were negligible
default.  Therefore
default in my view
default one cannot
default 
defaultattribute 
defaultthese recent events
default 
defaultwith any confidence 
defaultto
default someth
defaulting 
defaultbeyond nature.  Climate models are 
defaultpromoted as tools that are able
default to discriminate 
defaultnatural climate events
default versus 
defaultthose that
default might happen as a result of the increases in greenhouse gases due to human activities
default and have been used by EPA for regulatory a
defaultction
default.  Unfortunately, as demonstrated here
default and discussed in the literature
default, climate models have not demonstrated acceptable skill in terms of depicting
default even
default 
defaultvery 
defaultfundamental, large-scale climate variations, and thus are unable to identify natural versus human-influenced events on regional scales.  Indeed, the lack of modeling skill regarding very basic processes such as tropical tropospheric variations, indica
defaulttes that the modeling enterprise has not been subject to rigorous, independent “Red Team” oversight during its expensive growth 
defaultperiod.  In addition,
default significant advancements are needed in observing and understanding the natural processes of climate before
default reliable, though basic, forecasts are forthcoming.   
defaultIt is unfortunate
default, in my opinion,
default that recent policy has been made based on the projections of these faulty models.  
defaultClimate science has a long way to go.
default&#xa0;
defaultReferences:
default&#xa0;
defaultChristy, J.R. and R.T. McNider, 
default1
default994: 
defaultSatellite greenhouse signal.  
defaultNature
default, 376, p. 325.  Relevant quote, “Curve “e” reveals an upward trend of +0.09 °C per decade, or about one-quarter of the magnitude of climate model results.”
default&#xa0;
defaultChristy, J.R. 2010, “Open Debate, Wikipedia Style”, 
defaultNature
default, vol 463, p 732.
default  (See below).
default&#xa0;
defaultDouglass, D.H., J.R. Christy, B.D. Pearson and S.F. Singer, 2007:  A comparison of tropical temperature trends with model predictions.  International J. Climatology, DOI: 10.1002/joc.1651.
default&#xa0;
defaultDouglass, D.H. and J.R. Christy, 
default2013:  Reconciling observations of global temperature c
defaulthange: 2013.  Eng. and Environ.
default 24, 415-419.
default&#xa0;
defaultMcKitrick
default, R.R., S. McIntyre and C. Herman, (2010): Panel and multivariate  methods for tests of trend equivalence in climate data sets.
default&#xa0;
default Atmos. Sci. Lett.
default, 11(4), 270-277.
default&#xa0;
default doi: 10.1002/asl.290. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMcKitrick, Ross, Stephen McIntyre and Chad Herman (2011)
default&#xa0;
defaultCorrection to "Panel and Multivariate Methods for Tests of Trend Equivalence in 
defaultClimate Data Series
default"
default&#xa0;
defaultAtmospheric Science Letters
default&#xa0;
defaultOctober 7 2011,
default&#xa0;
defaultDOI: 10.1002/asl.360.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSwanson,K. 2013: Emerging selection bias in large-scale climate change simulations.  Geophys. Res. 40, 3184-3188.  DOI:10.1002/grl50562.
default&#xa0;
defaultThomas, E.R., T.J. Bracegi
defaultrdle, J. Turner and E.W. Wolff, 2013: A 308 year record of climate variability in West Antarctica.  Geophys. Res. Lett., 40, 5492-5496.  DOI:10.1002/2013GL057782.
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
defaultPosted on
default 
defaultSeptember 28, 2013
default 
default|
default 
default577 Comments
default 
defaultby Judith Curry
defaultDiagnosis: paradigm paralysis, caused by motivated reasoning, oversimplification, and consensus seeking; worsened and made permane
defaultnt by a vicious positive feedback effect at the climate science-policy interface.
defaultIn a previous 
defaultpost
default, I discussed the IPCC’s diagnosis of a planetary 
defaultfever and their prescription for planet Earth. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn this post, I provide a diagnosis and prescription for the IPCC.
defaultIn the 1990’s, the world’s nations embarked on a path to prevent dangerous anthropogenic climate change by stabilization of the concentration
defaults of atmospheric greenhouse gases, which was codified by the 1992 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) treaty. The IPCC scientific assessments play a primary role in legitimizing national and international policies aimed at reducing greenhous
defaulte gas emissions. This objective has led to the IPCC assessments being framed around identifying anthropogenic influences on climate, dangerous environmental and socio-economic impacts of climate change, and stabilization of CO
default2
default concentrations in the atmosp
defaulthere.
defaultAt the time of establishment of the UNFCCC, there was as yet no clear signal of anthropogenic warming in the observations, as per the IPCC First Assessment Report (FAR) in 1990. It wasn’t until the IPCC’s Second Assessment Report in 1995 that a 
default‘disc
defaulternible’
default human influence on global climate was identified. The scientific support for the UNFCCC treaty was not based on observations, but rather on our theoretical understanding of the greenhouse effect and simulations from global climate models.
default&#xa0;
default In the 
defaultearly 1990’s there was the belief in the feasibility of reducing uncertainties in climate science and climate models, and a consensus seeking approach was formalized by the IPCC. General circulation climate models became elevated to the central role by pol
defaulticy actors and scientists from other fields investigating climate change impacts and applications – this has in turn has elevated the role and position of these climate models in climate change research. Very substantial investments have been made in furth
defaulter developing climate models, with the expectations that these models will provide actionable information for policy makers.
defaultIn 2006/2007, climate change had soared to the top of the international political agenda, as a result of Hurricane Katrina, Al Gore
default’s 
defaultAn Inconvenient Truth
default, publication of the IPCC AR4 in 2007, and award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Al Gore and the IPCC.
default&#xa0;
default It was claimed that the science was settled, and that it clearly demanded radical policy and governmental action to substantially cu
defaultt CO2 emissions.
defaultSymptoms of the diseasedefaultSeven years later, with the release of the IPCC AR5, we find ourselves between the metaphorical rock and a hard place with regards to climate science and policy:
defaultAnd finally:
defaultDiagnosis of the cause of the diseasedefaultHow and why did we land between a rock and a hard place on the climate change issu
defaulte?
default&#xa0;
default There are probably many contributing reasons, but the most fundamental and profound reason is arguably that both the problem and solution were vastly oversimplified back in 1990 by the UNFCCC/IPCC, where the framed both the problem and the solution as 
defaultirreducibly global. This framing was locked in by a self-reinforcing consensus-seeking approach to the science and a ‘speaking consensus to power’ approach for decision making that pointed to only one possible course of policy action – radical emissions re
defaultductions. The climate community has worked for more than 20 years to establish a scientific consensus on anthropogenic climate change. The IPCC consensus building process played a useful role in the early synthesis of the scientific knowledge. However, the
default ongoing scientific consensus seeking process has had the unintended consequence of oversimplifying both the problem and its solution and hyper-politicizing both, introducing biases into the both the science and related decision making processes.
defaultIn their 
defaultWrong Trousers
default essay, Prins and Rayner
default&#xa0;
defaultargue that we have made the wrong cognitive choices in our attempts to define the problem of climate change,
default by relying on strategies that worked previously with ozone, sulphur emissions and nuclear bombs. While these issues may share some superficial similarities with the climate change problems, they are ‘tame’ problems (complicated, but with defined and achie
defaultvable end-states), whereas climate change is ‘wicked’ (comprising open, complex and imperfectly understood systems). For wicked problems, effective policy requires profound integration of technical knowledge with understanding of social and natural systems
default. In a wicked problem, there is no end to causal chains in interacting open systems, and every wicked problem can be considered as a symptom of another problem; if we attempt to simplify the problem, we become risk becoming prisoners of our own assumptions
default.
defaultThe framing of the climate change problem by the UNFCCC/IPCC and the early articulation of a preferred policy option by the UNFCCC has arguably marginalized research on broader issues surrounding climate variability and change, resulting in an overconfid
defaultent assessment of the importance of greenhouse gases in future climate change and stifling the development of a broader range of policy options.
default&#xa0;
default The result of this simplified framing of a wicked problem is that we lack the kinds of information to more bro
defaultadly understand climate change and societal vulnerability.
defaultParadigm paralysis is the inability or refusal to see beyond the current models of thinking. The vast amount of scientific and political capital invested in the IPCC has become self-reinforcing, so
default it is not clear how move past this paralysis as long as the IPCC remains in existence. The wickedness of the climate change problem makes if difficult to identify points of irrefutable failure in either the science or the policies, although the IPCC’s ins
defaultistence that the pause is irrelevant and temporary could provide just such a refutation if the pause continues. In any event, there is a growing realization of that neither the science or policy efforts are making much progress, and particularly in view of
default the failure climate models to predict the stagnation in warming, and that perhaps it is time to step back and see if we can do a better job of understanding and predicting climate variability and change and reducing societal and ecosystem vulnerabilities.
defaultBroader implications of the diseasedefault&#xa0;defaultSpecifically with regards to climate research, for the past decade most of the resources have been expended on providing projections of future climate change using complex Earth system models, assessing and interpretin
defaultg the output of climate models, and application of the output of climate models by the climate impacts community.
defaultThe large investment in climate modeling, both in the U.S. and internationally, has been made with the expectation that climate models will su
defaultpport decision making on both mitigation and adaptation responses to climate change. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSo, are these complex global climate models especially useful for decision makers?
default&#xa0;
default The hope, and the potential, of climate models for providing credible regional climate
default change scenarios have not been realized.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultWith the failure of climate models to simulate the pause and regional climate variability, we have arguably reached the point of diminishing returns from this particular path of climate modeling – not just for de
defaultcision support but also for scientific understanding of the climate system.
default&#xa0;
default In pursuit of this climate modeling path, the climate modeling community — and the funding agencies and the policy makers — have locked themselves into a single climate modeling f
defaultramework with a focus on production runs for the IPCC, which has been very expensive in terms of funding and personnel. An unintended consequence of this strategy is that there has been very little left over for true climate modeling innovations and fundam
defaultental research into climate dynamics and theory — such research would not only support amelioration of deficiencies and failures in the current climate modeling systems, but would also lay the foundations for disruptive advances in our understanding of the
default climate system and our ability to predict emergent phenomena such as abrupt climate change.
defaultAs a result, we’ve lost a generation of climate dynamicists, who have been focused on climate models rather than on
default 
defaultclimate dynamics and theory that is needed to 
defaultunderstand the effects of the sun on climate, the network of natural internal variability on multiple time scales, the mathematics of extreme events, and predictability of a complex system characterized by spatio-temporal chaos. New structural forms are ne
defaulteded for climate models that are capable of simulating the natural internal variability of the coupled ocean-atmosphere system on timescales from days to millennia and that can accurately account for the fast thermodynamic feedback processes associated wit
defaulth clouds and water vapor.
defaultHoping and expecting to rely on information from climate models about projected regional climate change to guide adaptation response has diverted attention from using observational, historical and paleoclimate data from the region
default to more usefully develop the basis for future scenarios. Further, increased scientific focus on subseasonal (weeks) and seasonal (months) weather/climate forecasts could produce the basis for tactical adaptation practices with substantial societal benefit
defaults.
defaultSecuring the common interest on local and regional scales (referred to by Brunner and Lynch as “
defaultadaptive governance
default”) provides the rationale for effective
default climate adaptation strategies. This requires abandoning the irreducibly global consensus seeking approach in favor of open debate and discussion of a broad range of policy options that stimulate local and regional solutions to the multifaceted and interre
defaultlated issues surrounding climate change.
defaultThe IPCC needs to get out of the way so that scientists and policy makers can better do their jobs.
defaultConclusiondefaultThe diagnosis of paradigm paralysis seems fatal in the case of the IPCC, given the widespread nature of 
defaultthe infection and intrinsic motivated reasoning.
default&#xa0;
default We need to put down the IPCC as soon as possible – not to protect the patient who seems to be thriving in its own little cocoon, but for the sake of the rest of us whom it is trying to infect with its disea
defaultse.
default&#xa0;
default Fortunately much of the population seems to be immune, but some governments seem highly susceptible to the disease. However, the precautionary principle demands that we not take any risks here, and hence the IPCC should be put down.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default