Written evidence from John Dwyer, Police and Crime Commissioner, Cheshire [CST0041]default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat, if any, targets do you set for your police force? What impact do you think this has on police recording crime practices?default&#xa0;
defaultThe only target set by my Police and Crime Plan is that of reducing crime, there are no targets set for individual crime types nor for detection. 
defaultHowever
default contained within my plan there are measures to allow 
defaultme to perform my statutory functions and hold the Chief Constable to account for the performance of the Constabulary. T
defaulthese have been developed and agreed with the Constabulary, in order to ensure that they result in effective and meaningful data and to 
defaultmake certain
default that they do not 
defaultresult in 
defaultperverse incentiv
defaultes, thus driving bad
default practice. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHow do you assure yourself that the recorded crime figures for your area are correct? To what extedefaultnt can you trust the crime statistics for your area? default&#xa0;
defaultThe Constabulary rigorously audits its crime recording, analysing anomalies to understand the reasons for them and this is 
defaultscrutinised by 
defaultme 
defaultas part of my scrutiny processes. This process includes quarterly Public Scrutiny Boards and monthly meetings with the Chief
default Constable and his Chief Officer team. 
defaultI believe the Constabulary’s crime recording to 
defaultbe good
default, it was judged as such by Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary in 2010 and 
defaultI
default look forward to a further inspection of crime recording in the New Year.
default I have also commissioned a piece of work to be undertaken by the 
defaultAudit Committee 
defaultwhich will 
defaultreview
default the integrity of crime recording practices in Cheshire and provide me with additional reassurance that standards are being properly applied. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default