&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Nisai Group
default&#xa0;
defaultIssues and concerns raised in the Annual Report relating to the performance of local authorities in child protection and services for looked-after children
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are many positive commitments to ensuring that local 
defaultauthorities provide the best services for looked after children in the Annual Report.  However, there are still some issues that need addressing including:
default&#xa0;
defaultIn addition, over 
default10% of children are still being moved more than three times a year
default 
defaultwith m
defaultore than half only given a week's notice or les
defaults of being moved to another foster home and 
defaulta quarter given no notice at all. This
default does 
defaultnot provide a stable context for learning
default, and f
defaultrequent relocation ranks as poor practice by an authority that neither understands a child’s needs, nor changes their 
defaulteducational prognosis.
default&#xa0;
defaultThis need not be the case. Ofsted’s report also states that better authorities “had robust data systems that enabled virtual schools to monitor and track the progress of children, individually as well as collectively” as well as add
defaultress specific educational issues through the use of technology.  This means there is support for its wider use in the education of looked after children - a sensible position as technology: 
default&#xa0;
defaultOne example of an online education provider is The Nisai Virtual Academy (NVA).  It is 
defaultan award winning online learning community
default, on a secure e
defaultncrypted platform that provides a 
defaultreal-time teaching environment
default with CRB checked specialist teachers
default&#xa0;
defaultthat specialise
default in 
defaultSEN and 
defaultpersonalised learning
default. 
defaultIn addition, it provides a secure reporting system that keeps the virtual head informed of attendance, contribution and behaviour meaning that 
defaultthose who are excluded from traditional education
default can 
defaultaccess full and proper education online.
default&#xa0;
defaultEach learner has 
defaulttheir own personal profile based on their ability and the subjects that they want to study.  It 
defaultallows
default students to engage in live lessons with teachers and other students as well as
default providing a 
defaultwell being centre
default to help reduce barriers to learning
default.  Indeed
default, 
defaultthe results speak for themselves. T
defaulthe students who use the NVA are often those who, in the eyes of the majority, are unlikely to gain any qualifications and/or achieve anything with their lives.  Considering that a quarter
default of looked-after 
defaultchildren still 
defaultobtain no qualifications with a further quarter obtaining fewer than five GCSEs or equivalent, 
defaultthey can be easily placed in this category. 
defaultHowever, last year 91% of the students of Nisai Learning achieved GCSE and A-level qualifications, and 30.6% achieved
default A* to C grades – a figure below the national average but again, considering many of these students would have had no GCSE or A-levels under their belts without the use of the online education, 
defaultthis is 
defaultan impressive achievement. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWith this in mind, action
default needs to be taken to:
default&#xa0;
defaultIssues and concerns raised in the Annual Report relating to the performance of secure accommodation
default&#xa0;
defaultThe report states that “28% of young people in secure children’s homes were neg
defaultative about the support they receive with their work or education”.  A terrifying statistic backed up by previous reports that:
default&#xa0;
defaultEducation is one of the key elements to a young person being able to leave a life of crime behind. However, many offenders in custody are unable to access traditional education; and for that reason online education provision can help these young pe
defaultople.   Indeed, many young offenders have experienced ‘disrupted education’ in the mainstream system and this often continues once they are in a secure location.   Providing them with access to online learning tools like the Nisai Virtual Academy, would ov
defaultercome this problem, as they would be able to study from any location, provided they have access to a PC or laptop with a broadband Internet connection. Not only will this provide continuity in their learning whilst they are in custody, but would enable th
defaultem to continue their studies without interruption once they complete their custodial sentence. Latest figures show there were “just 119 GCSE passes in public sector young offender institutions in 2010/11, the latest year for which figures are available. Th
defaultis represents a 49 per cent drop on the number of passes for 2009/10, when the figure stood at 232…”
default The opportunity to study in a consistent manner will not only give young offenders the best chance to succeed, but will also support their resettlement an
defaultd enhance their ability to re-engage with education, training and employment.  It will also mean that young people can engage with the education system without feeling that they are dealing with the “authorities” with whom they may have trust issues becaus
defaulte of previous treatment or experiences.  
default&#xa0;
defaultWith this in mind action needs to be taken to:
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default http://1e3de8be9eb9f6172fd3-fbec1a74094b5b55
default67335038623e5584.r36.cf2.rackcdn.com/Social%20Care%20Annual%20Report%20201213.pdf
default http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmselect/cmeduc/924/924.pdf
default 
defaultChildren's Care Monitor survey of 2,000 children
default Figures provided by the Nisai Group: 1
defaultst
default September 2010
default 
defaultBreakthrough Britain: Ending the Costs of Social Breakdown
default; Social Justice Policy Group; July 2007
default 
defaultReport of Chief Inspector of the Adult Learning Inspectorate 
default2004-5
default http://www.cypnow.co.uk/cyp/news/1075367/gcse-passes-offenders-halv
defaultes
default