Written evidence fromdefault Claire Morgandefault (CYS 107)default&#xa0;
defaultI would like to submit the following comments as part of the cycling safety consultation.default 
default&#xa0;
default1. General informationdefault &amp; contextdefault&#xa0;
default1.1
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultI 
defaultam a 
default“utility cyclist” living in the rural village community of 
defaultOvingdean
default 
defaulton the eastern outskirts of Brighton in East Sussex. The village is bounded on all sides by main roads including the A259 trunk coastal road to the south.
default 
default1.2
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultA
defaultlthough I am a Brighton &amp;
default Hove City Council officer, I am writing in a personal 
defaultcapacity f
defaultrom the perspective of 
defaulta resident of a city which is apparently the UK’s least car-dependent outside London. Yet, a
defaults someone who has placed concern and action for the environment at the core 
defaultof my lifestyle since the early eighties, I have become increasingly concerned about (a) the relentless 
defaultlocal 
defaultmarch of a “car culture” and (b) the resulting, highly damaging in every respect, “them and us ‘war’ ” which has developed between regular drivers
default and cyclists. 
default1.3
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultW
defaulte must do everything we can to encourage 
defaultmore 
defaultpeople to cycle
default, more often – the 
defaultreasons for, and benefits of, 
defaultthis are well documented.  As a society, we urgently need to pursue a variety of enhanced and new measures, targeted at ALL road 
defaultusers,
default 
defaultthat
default will support and enable safe and responsible cycling
default. But with th
defaultis encouragement must come a 
defaultcorresponding 
defaultunderstanding 
defaultthat cyclists cannot 
defaultuse their relative superiority in terms of 
defaultthe 
defaultspeed and strength of their mode of transport
default compared to pedestrians to intimidate and thus 
defaultdeter 
defaultmore vulnerable 
defaultnon-car-borne 
defaultroad/street users.
default This is something I have been dismayed to observe increasingly
default in the city of Brighton and 
defaultHove, and I can only ascribe it to the attitudes mentioned in 
default1.2 above.
default&#xa0;
default2. Roads, defaulthighway defaultlayoutdefault, road speeds defaultand maintenancedefault&#xa0;
default2.1
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultDespite
default the widespread existence of dedicated cycle lanes in 
defaultmore 
defaultbike-friendly countries such as 
defaultHolland, Belgium, 
defaultDenmark
default and Germany
default, I d
defaulto NOT 
defaultbelieve that 
defaultsimply b
defaultlanketing this
default 
defaultcountry 
defaultwith 
defaultsegregated 
defaultcy
defaultcle lanes is 
defaultthe answer to 
defaultimprov
defaulting cycle safety. Indeed, the above-listed 
defaultcountries would 
defaultnot claim it is: their situations ar
defaulte the result of an average of 25 years+ 
defaultof positive, innovative cycle-promoting action. 
default 
defaultAs always, 
defaultas
default intimated above, a 
defaultrange of long-term measures, linked to comprehensive educationdefault programmes for all road users,default and in some cases defaultimproved and extended defaultlegdefaultislationdefault, is the best solution.
default C
defaultorralling cyclists into special lanes militates against 
defaultnormalising cycling as a transport mode and nurtures too many motorists’ belief that cyclists should not be on “their” road when and if there is no alternative route, or a cyclist chooses not to use a provided path.
default&#xa0;
default2.2
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultSegregated
default 
defaultcycle lanes 
defaultare 
defaultin my v
defaultiew 
defaultmore appropriate for “high-volume” urban areas, 
defaultor 
defaultfor linking these areas along key arterial or “desire 
defaultroutes
default” where there is significant potential for harm to cyclists.
default However, 
defaultcycle paths defaultMUST be continuous, sensibly joined updefault, or safety is again compromised as cyclists are 
defaultrepeatedly and/or unexpectedly 
default“turfed out” onto the highway. 
defaultCycle lanes 
defaultshould also be 
defaultmaintained on the same maintenance/repair schedule as the highway, defaultincluding cutting back vegetationdefault.
default 
defaultThis can include
default requiring private homeowners to prune back vegetation emanating from their premises. 
defaultOutside urban areas, where there may nevertheless be roads carrying fast traffic (such as in my local area), where pavements exist these should wherever possible 
defaultbe re-dedefaultsignated defaultand signed defaultas shared-usedefault. This will improve cyclists’ (and 
defaultdrivers’ )
default safety, as well as encouraging more cyclists.
default&#xa0;
default2.3 
defaultCdefaultolouringdefault all cycle lanes, whether kerb-lined or not, in a different colour to give clarity to cyclists and other road users including pedestrians (
defaultcf
default blue cycle lanes in London).
default This also raises awareness of cycling
default &amp; cyclists
default in general …
defaultPage 2default&#xa0;
default2.4. Re-designating an increased number of one-way smaller urban/city centre routes as able to be used as 
defaulttwo-way for cyclistsdefault. It is my observation in Brighton and Hove that cyclists, like water, will always prefer the shortest and quickest route, and wil
defaultl often be prepared to break the law on one-way streets to achieve this, thus compromising other road users’ and their own safety. A similar increase in the number of routes where all traffic except cyclists may turn right, left or go straight ahead would 
defaultbe helpful 
defaultfor the same reason.
default&#xa0;
default2.5
default 
defaultBrighton &amp; Hove has introduced an extensive programme of 
default20mph zonesdefault, including many around schools
default. While not necessarily popular with 
defaultdrivers, it has been widely welcomed by cyclists and other road users as supporting
default road safety in general, not simply for cyclists. 
defaultIt should be noted that these zones are, in the main, not supported/’enforced’ by road humps, which could impede the comfortable passage of cyclists, buses and emergency vehicles.
default&#xa0;
default2.6
default 
defaultRoad repair and defaultmaintenancedefault generally should be carried out in a manner which does not leave a 
default“gutter gap”default where asphalt ceases before the kerb or verge: this creates a hazard for cyclists (and moped/motorbike users) when and if they are pushed towards the side of the ro
defaultad by traffic, or out of nervousness. Such improved road surfacing would also benefit pedestrians.
default&#xa0;
default2.7
default 
defaultPolice and traffic wardensdefault must be encouraged to clamp down on parking across cycle lanes, and the few cases where parking across cycle lanes is permitt
defaulted should be abolished. 
default&#xa0;
default3. Helmetsdefault and cycle equipmentdefault&#xa0;
default3.1
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultI
default am NOT a supporter of compulsory bike helmet wearing, and in fact believe that legislating to make adult cycl
defaultists do so is counter-productive, as it militates against the ease and simplicity 
defaultof just getting on a bike and riding away
default. D
defaultata about the benefit
defaults
default or otherwise to individual cyclists’ safety from wearing helmets is polarised – at least for adults.  There is evidence showing that drivers see helmet-wearing cyclists as less vulnerable, and 
defaultthey 
defaultthus drive less carefully: there is also evidence indicat
defaulting that cyclists themselves cycle less carefully if they are wearing a helmet, for similar reasons. 
defaultFurther information, however, indicates that 
defaulthelmet wearing for childrendefault 
defaultis
default 
defaultbeneficial due to the different way in which children tend to fall from their b
defaultikes, compared to adults, 
defaultie
default children tend to sustain more head injuries when they fall from a bike than adults, although of course collisions with motorised transport are identically dangerous for all age groups.
default Improving road maintenance (see [2] above)
default would help reduce the need anyway!
default&#xa0;
default3.2
default              
defaultAll new bikes sold should be required to have an 
defaultenhancedefaultd level of reflective items defaulton board
default – something as simple as a range of stickers would be helpful.
default&#xa0;
default4.default              defaultTrainingdefault&#xa0;default4.1
default              
defaultThe nationwide children’s 
default“defaultcycle defaultproficiency” schemedefault is not compulsory, but it should be made so, and centrally funded – to include secondary-aged children.
default4.2
default              
defaultSome 
defaultbus and PSV drivers already undergo cycle/cyclist awareness trainingdefault – this should be made compulsory, with a requirement t
defaulthat it is refreshed on a regular basis. Brighton &amp; Hove City Council runs a programme whereby cyclists are invited to sit in a bus driver’s cab, to identify the blind spots. I would like to see this programme extended for cyclists.
defaultPage 3default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default5default. Public infodefaultrmationdefault and awareness-raisingdefault&#xa0;
defaultThe big success of making drinking and driving 
defaultsocially 
defaultunacceptable came through public information campaigns
default over a sustained period of time
default, as did other successful campaigns like smoking
default cessation
default. 
defaultThe scope for 
defaulthelping defaultthe safety of cycling through such public information campaignsdefault is immense. 
defaultCampaigns don’t need to be as graphic as some countries (
defaulteg
default Australia) have chosen to do, but a campaign could take forms such as the following:
default&#xa0;
default6default. defaultLegislationdefault&#xa0;default6.1
default              
defaultThe 
defaultHighway Codedefault needs to be updated, so 
defaultit is less focused on motorised vehicles, and more inclusive of the safety-enhancing needs of other road users including cyclists. This could include stating a 
defaultminimum space between vehicles and bikesdefault, both while passing and before and after overtaking. 
default6
default.2
default              
defaultConsideration of introducing a 
default“presumption of guilt” defaultlaw, such as operates in other continental European countries, whereby in
default the event of a collision between a cyclists and a motorised vehicle, the driver of the latter is automatically assumed to be 
defaultat fault, unless it can be proved otherwise. This legislative approach appears to cement an attitude of greater respect for cyclists’ safety and well-being from drivers.
default6.3
default              
defaultEnshrining in law a requirement for 
defaultbicycles to be kept in a roadworthy statedefault.
default&#xa0;
default7.default              defaultCyclists are not necessarily a special case …default&#xa0;
defaultThe need to encourage cycling does not mean 
defaultignoring others’ rights to fairness and respect. 
defaultAny message 
default–
default through
default 
defaultpublic information films or general government guidance 
default–
default should
default 
defaultbe that with rights come 
defaultresponsibilities, and c
defaultyclists should be held accountable for their own 
defaultinap
defaultpropriate cycling in the same way as motorists should be.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default