&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr Patrick O’Bridefaulten default(CRJ 14)default(The Constitution Unit, UCL)
defaultGeneral observationsdefaultThis submission is submitted in a personal capacity, but is informed by work I have done with colleagues for the past three years on an AHRC-funded project on 
defaultThe Politics of Judicial Independence in Britain’s Changing Constitution
default. 
defaultThere are two important aspects to the role of the judiciary under any
default constitution. The first is
default what I will call the ‘substantive power’ aspect
default – the role of the judge
default as a decider
default in recognisable courtroom 
defaultscenarios
default. Under this heading we can group questions like
default: “H
defaultow much power 
defaultshould judges have to judicially review Government decisions?” and “Is there any circumstance in which a court should have the power to quash statutory law?”
default The second
default aspect
default I will 
defaultrefer to as the ‘administrative’ 
defaultaspect. Here we need to consider how courts and the judiciary are to be funded, managed and appointed and what role Parliament and the Government should have
default in these 
defaultareas
default. 
defaultThis inquiry is concerned largely with the first 
defaultaspect
default 
default–
default 
defaultthe
default substantive power of judges – 
defaultbut
default the two issues
default are intertwined.
default The degree to which politicians are prepared to trust the judiciary to exercise a judicial review jurisdiction responsibly, for example, will depend to some extent on whether those politicians trust the process by 
defaultwhich those judges are appointed, and the wider
default judicial
default culture within which they operate.
default 
defaultOne point that has emerged from our project on 
defaultThe Politics of Judicial Independence 
defaultis that judges now engage 
defaultwith parliamentar
defaulty committees on a regular basis, 
defaultand that this form of contact has increased over time as contributions by serving judges to parliamentary debate 
defaultwere phased out
default.
default 
defaultThere were 121 appearances by 61 judges before 16 different committees in the years 2003 to 2012
default; appearances prior to 2003 were very rare.
default 
defaultThis is 
defaulta useful illustration of the fact that
default a distinctive
default constitutional culture – in 
defaultthis case, the
default culture
default in Britain
default of engagement between Parliament and the judiciary – can persist
default despite significant constitutional change.
default Judges can no longer speak in the Lords, so they tend to engage with Select Committees.
default 
defaultT
defaulthe UK is a
defaultn
default outlier in this respect: in many other jurisdictions direct contact between judges and Parliament is 
defaultdeprecated
default 
defaultor discouraged 
defaultas 
defaultincompatible with
default concepts of the separation of powers.
defaultThe example is also valuable for its own sake.
default To build and maintain trust between judges and politicians requires that there be contact between them. This 
defaultwill be 
defaultimportant
default 
defaultunder a codified constitution – and perhaps acutely important during the transition to such a constitution – just as 
defaultunder the current arrangements.
default Judicial appearances before Select Committees have, unsurprisingly, been 
defaultmost frequent during periods of constitutional change
default (such as during the 2003-2005 
defaultperiod
default)
default.
default 
defaultThis existing culture
default of engagement should be encouraged and preserved
default. I
defaultt would be u
defaultnfortunate if 
defaulta codified constitution 
defaultwith a more formal separation of powers led to the loss of this culture of engagement.
default&#xa0;defaultResponse to the inquiry questionsdefault1. What is the constitutional role of the judiciary and in what principal respects would the role of change if the United Kingdom were to move towards a codified constitution?defaultAt its core, the constitutional role of the judiciary is to adjudicate disputes impartially and independently
default based on the law
default.
default 
defaultInsofar as 
defaultthey bear a constitutional duty, it is to decide
default the
default disputes that are brought before them
default.
default 
defaultThere is nothing inherent in the 
defaultconcept
default of a codified 
defaultconstitution that necessitates any change in the United Kingdom’s current constitutional arrangements
default, including to the role of the judiciary
default. There is no reason why 
defaultthe
default current
default arrangements 
defaultcould not be expressed 
defaultin a writt
defaulten and codified form
default.
default2. What forms of consultation with the judiciary would be necessary to ensure that the legal and judicial implications of codifying the constitution were taken into account?defaultThe judiciary should be consulted (and involved) as part of any process of codification. The parliamentary inquiry model has worked well for this 
defaulttype of work in the last decade, but the way in which the judiciary are involved will depend on the process of codification itself. A process that is led by Parliament will require a different form of involvement to one that is citizen-led.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3. If the UK were to have a codified constitution, what powers should the courts have if they held that a piece of ledefaultgislation was unconstitutional?default a) What would be the implications of these powers on existing constitutional doctrines, including parliamentary sovereignty and judicial defaultreview? b) In the context of question 3, what can we learn from the interaction between the UK courts and the European Court of Justice and European Court of Human Rights?defaultAs above, there is no reason why a codified constitution should lead to any significant change to the powers of the courts. That said, many written constitutions do implement some form of enhanced judicial review in relation to co
defaultnstitutional matters. There is 
defaultlogic to this, because it is generally intended (although not 
defaultstrictly speaking 
defaultrequired) that a codified constitutio
defaultn will have some superior status
default. 
defaultTo protect this status
default, it will be necessary to have some way of resolving
default conflict
defaults
default between the constitution and 
defaultother laws
default. It will often fall to the judiciary to identify where these conflicts exist
default, simply because they will inevitably
default arise
default in the context of ordinary litigation.
default If a 
defaultdefendant to
default, for example, a 
defaultdriving offence asserts that 
defaultshe committed no crime 
defaultbecause the Road Traffic Act is unconstitutional
default and so not valid law
default, it will be almost impossible for the court to avoid 
defaultengaging with the constitutional aspect of the problem.
defaultThis does not, however, require that the court be given the power to quash the Road Traffic Act. T
defaulthe consequence of a finding of unconstitutionality does not have to be that a statute is nullified (as
default it is
default in the case in jurisdictions like the USA and Ireland). The German Constitutional Court takes
default a broader 
defaultand more pragmatic 
defaultapproach. Whilst in some cases it will declare an unconstitutional statute to be null and void, it will sometimes make a more limited declaration
default that the statute is unconstitutional but that the legislature must resolve the problem by a given deadline. On occasion it has allowed an unconstitutional statute to remain in force; in the 
defaultSaarland 
defaultcase it concluded that an agreement for the Government of Saarland that violated the German constitution should be upheld, on the basis that the alternative was worse.
defaultAnother example, closer to home, exists 
defaultin the ‘declaration of incompatibility’ mechanism contained in the Human Rights Act
default (HRA). 
defaultWhere a court identifies a problem of unconstitutionality it could
default, drawing on the mode
defaultl
default of section 4 of the HRA,
default issue a declaratory judgment and leave the matter to Parliament
default to resolve
default.
default Again borrowing from the HRA (section 10), such a declaration could trigger a fast-track amendment process for amending the statute in question.
default A process of this kind could be implemented within a codified constitution without any risk to the sovereignty of Parliament.
default4. If there were a codified constitution, should the courts be able to assess the constitutional validity of a Bill before it becomes an Act? What would be the advantages and disadvantages of such a system?defaultNo, on balance it would be best not to have abstract review of this kind. 
defaultAbstract review of a bill may help to reduce the possibility of any glaring and unintended constitutional errors but Parliament is generally capable of avoiding these on its own. 
defaultThe 
defaultprimary 
defaultbenefit abstract review appears to offer 
defaultis that it promises 
defaultsome measure of certainty that bills
default that have been through a constitutional 
defaultassessment
default will not be deemed unconstitutional by the courts at some point in the future. However, a
defaultbstract review can only 
defaultexamine
default the compatibility of the text of the bill with the codified constitution. 
defaultIn reality, 
defaultthe manner in which a statute is
default enforced 
defaultwill
default 
defaultbe
default a very important 
defaultcomponent
default o
defaultf the constitutional assessment. 
defaultMany 
defaultproblems 
defaultcan
default 
defaultonly become apparent once a policy or statute is
default implemented. This is as true for problems of unconstitutionality as it is for anything else.
default 
defaultIt is possible to inoculate bills that have been through an abstract review process against further constitutional 
defaultscrutiny
default 
defaultbut this can only be done at the cost of ignoring the point made above: that unconstitutionality will often be
defaultcome
default apparent only when a statute is implemented.
defaultParliament does, however, sometimes seek the input of the judiciary as part of the legislative process. There is no reason why this practice could not 
defaultbe extended to 
defaultinclude consideration of 
defaultabstract 
defaultc
defaultonstitutional issue
defaults under a codified constitution
default; albeit that judges are likely to be unwilling to wish to commit themselves o
defaultn the
default specific
defaults
default.
default Additionally or alternatively, the Attorney General could be given a formal responsibility 
defaultto alert Parliament wherever proposed legislation is likely to be unconstitutional.
default&#xa0;
default5. Would a Constitutional Court function best as part of the Supreme Court, or should it be separate? If the latter, how should it be appointed?defaultA
default separate constitutional court
default would not be appropriate
default. Dedicated constitutional courts are mostly found in civil law countries that tend to have an array of specialised court systems
default – in such a system a subject-specific constitutional court makes sense
default. Whilst the UK court system has moved towards greater specialisation in the last 20 years or so, 
defaultthe court system remain
defaults unified and
default the single Supreme Court model is more culturally 
defaultapt
default.
default6. When considering the constitutional role of the judiciary in the context of a codified constitution, are there any particularly instructive lessons to be drawn from other countries with common law jurisdictions and written constitutions?defaultSweden is not a common law country but its constitutional culture is similar to that of the UK (with, for example, a constitutional monarchy, an easily amended constitution
default that is contained in several documents
default and significant parliamentary involvement in the protection of human rights
default).
default It might be a useful example to draw on.
default17 December 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultSaarland
default 4 BVerfGE 157 (1955).
default As is done in relation to the abstract review procedure in the Irish Constitution: see Article 26 (which describes the procedure) and Article 34.3.3 (which provides that the validity of a statute that has passed the Article 26 procedure cannot be further challenged).
default As applies in relation to the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 (section 7).
default