&#xa0;
defaultIt would depend whether the constitution granted the judiciary/
default 
defaultSupreme/
default 
defaultConstitutional Cou
defaultrt the power to review provision
defaults in Acts of Parliament for constitutionality, and if it 
defaultdid,
default what powers it granted the judiciary by way of remedy. 
defaultConstitutionality, in this context, could refer to the substance/content of a law and/or to whether the correct procedure had been followed in Parliament before it was passed – e.g. 
default2/3 majorities in both Houses, etc.
defaultStrike down powersdefaultFor instance, if the judiciary had the r
defaultight to 
defaultstrike down
default a provision
default in an Act of Parliament which
default they found to be incompatible with the Constitution, this would expose the judges to political pressure and criticism
default,
default not only from politicians but also 
defaultoften 
defaultfrom the press and sections of the public.
default 
defaultMuch would depend upon the culture that would develop in the UK
default, especially among politicians
default,  under
default a codified Constitution
default. In the USA, as is well known, the Supreme Court is considered to be party political. In Germany
default the 
defaultBundesverfassungsgericht
default is
default highly resp
defaultected and regarded as neutral; th
defaultis
default is also
default true
default of top courts
default in, e.g. South Africa, Israel.  It would be most undesirable if arrangements under a codified constitution were to undermine the respect in which the judiciary, especially the Supreme Court, is held by putting them in a position to strike down ‘unconstitutional’ provisions.
defaultDisapplication powersdefaultA variation on the ‘strike down’ power would be a power under the Constitution for courts to 
defaultdisapply
default a provision that was found to be incompatible with the Constitution in the particular case,
default and applying the Constitution itself directly rather than the ‘unconstitutional’ provision in an Act, but
default without making the provision legally invalid for the future
default and for other litigants
default. 
defaultThis device puts the responsibility for removing ‘unconstitutional’ laws from the statute book on government and Parliament (‘remedial orders’ like those under the HRA could be provided for) rather than on the courts, while at the same time providing the claimant with a remedy. 
defaultThis is the approach
default adopted
default in the Nordic countries and
default many civil law jurisdictions: t
defaulthe plaintiff is granted a remedy in the case (unlike the position with declarations of incompatibility under the Human Rights Acts, where the plaintiff remains subject to 
defaultthe law despite its breach of the ECHR) but the law remains valid on the statute book until it is repealed or amended by the
default executive/
default legislature. 
defaultDeclarations of incompatibilitydefaultI
defaultf a British Supreme Court
default were given express power in the Constitution to make 
default‘
defaultdeclarations of
default (constitutional)
default incompatibility
default’
default (as judges in New Zealand have assumed in relation to their 
defaultBoRA
default) this would put the issue back in the court of politicians and 
defaultminimise
default conflict between judges and politicians.
default 
defaultPlacing the responsibilitydefault for constitutionalitydefault on politiciansdefaultIf the courts’ powers were limited to disapplication or declaration of constitutional incompatibility, it
default would be for the government to decide whether to correct the constitutional incompatibility by amending the offending statutory provision, or to let the incompatibility stand, or to secure the amendment of the written Constitution.
default 
defaultThe effectiveness of such an arrangement in deterring governments from promoting and Parliament from passing ‘unconstitutional’ laws would depend on the regulation of processes and procedures in the development and passing of bills before they receive royal assent. As long as there were – as there are now – strong pressures on government and departments not to propose ‘
defaultuncconstitutional
default’ measures, it would be very rare for such measures to reach the statute book. 
defaultIt is worth noting t
defaulthe arrangements currently in place
default to deter the inclusion of provisions in bills, regulations etc
default that breach EU law, the ECHR and other international obligations of the UK
default. S
defaultuch arrangements could form part of the prevent
defaultat
defaultive machinery where
default the passage of
default ‘unconstitutional’ laws might be 
defaultbeing 
defaultconsidered
default by government
default. 
defaultCurrent arrangements
default include
default:
default 
defaultAnd, o
defaultnce a bill or draft bill is published by
default, the House of Lords Constitution Committee, the Joint Committee on Human Rights, the EU Committees in both Houses and other select committees 
defaultscrutinise
default the proposals and report on any problems of a ‘constitutional’ nature.
default (My chapter on Parliament and the Courts explores these arrangements.)
default 
defaultWould a new, non-judicial, body be needed to prevent/deter unconstitutional law-making?defaultIt may be that a new, statutory, independent and expert, Scrutiny Commission should be created under a codified constitution
default; it could be tasked with 
defaultscrutinising
default bills and 
defaultdraft bills for such issues. The influence of such a body
default in deterring unconstitutional law making
default would depend upon the
default balance between party politics and constitutionalism in the
default culture
defaults
default in 
defaultthe governing party or parties, and
default in Parliament, and whether the Scrutiny Commission had the power to delay the progress made by a bill in Parliament
default in order to induce government to respond to its reports and concerns. 
defaultComparisons with other countriesdefault lacking judicial strike downdefaultThe NetherlandsdefaultBy way of comparison with the position in other well-functioning Western liberal democracie
defaults,
default 
defaultArticle 120 of the Constitution of the
default Netherlands forbids judicial striking down/disapplication of provisions in Acts for incompatibility with the Constitution
default.
default Instead there is 
defaulta
defaultn extra-parliamentary non-partisan body
default in the Netherlands
default, the
default Council of State
default,
default which 
defaultscrutinises
default bills 
defaultbefore
default they are passed and repor
defaultts to Parliament if they find them
default to be defective e.g. as being unconstitutional.
default Their reports are commonly accepted.
default 
default(
defaultOn the other hand
default, unlike the UK,
default the NL is a monist state, which means that international instruments such as the ECHR are directly effective and enforceable in their courts. So much of what might be ‘unconstitutional’ in the NL can be challe
defaultn
defaultged
default in court
default by litigants
default on the 
defaultground that it is incompatible with 
defaultinternational instruments, and not by challenging their constitutionality
default in court
default.
default)
defaultFinlanddefaultThe courts in Finland had no power to strike down ‘unconstitutional’ legislation until the adoption of a new Constitution in 2000
default.
default Article 106 provides ‘If in a matter being tried by a court, the application of an Act would be in evident conflict with the 
defaultConstitution,
default the court of law shall give primacy to the provision in the Constitution’. However, ‘evident conflict’ has been very narrowly construed by the courts, and there have only been some ten cases in which the courts have exercised the power to give primacy to the Constitution over an Act.
default 
defaultFinland relies
default heavily
default on 
defaultintra-parliamentary scrutiny
default of bills
default for constitutionality
default 
defaultbefore
default they are enacted
default. 
defaultTheir 
defaultuni
default-cameral Parliament has a highly respected Constitutional Law Committee consisting of members of the chamber, which include
defaults
default some eminent lawyers. They 
defaultscrutiinise
default bills for compatibility with the constitution, they call experts to give evidence to them, they operate in a non-party political way, and they report to Parliament. Their reports are respected by government
default,
default which will normally amend the provisions that the Committee has found to be unconstitutional
default before the bill is passed
default. So it is rare
default in Finland
default for bills to be passed with unconstitutional provisions in them, unless they are passed by a special procedure
default that is the same as tha
defaultt for constitutional amendments. In such a
default case they are legally valid acts despite being incompatible with the Constitution.
default (They
default are called Acts of Exception; i
defaultt has been rare for such bills to be passed in the last decade or so.
default They can be repealed by simple majorities, just as ‘ordinary’ bills can be.
default)
default 
defaultGiven the adversarial  nature of politics in the House of Commons, continued reliance in the UK on intra-parliamentary scrutiny
default, even on the Finnish model,
default would only 
defaultwork
default in the second chamber, and then only
default if the second chamber were not politically adversarial. 
defaultSwedendefaultIn Sweden there is only very limited strike down power in the courts, and instead the 
defaultParliament’s 
defaultConstitutional Committee advises on the constitutionality of bills before they are enacted.
defaultFrancedefaultSince 2008 the French 
defaultconseil
default 
defaultconstitutionnel
default has power to refuse to give effect to provisions in Acts that are contrary to the Constitution. However, until 2008 the 
defaultconseil
default 
defaultconstitutionnel’s
default power was limited to deciding, before a 
defaultprojet
default de 
defaultloi
default/
defaultbill 
default was
default promulgated, whether it was contrary to the Constitution. If it so decided
default,
default the 
defaultprojet
default de 
defaultloi
default would not be promulgated. 
defaultThe reason for the pre-2008 position was that when the Fifth Republic was formed in 1946 it was considered important to pro
defaulttect the executive from an over-
defaultpowerful Parliament and the courts. In recent years that has no longer been the case and the current concern is to protect citizens against the state.
defaultIn summary,
default some Northern European countries with evolved constitutions (as the UK has) have other ways of securing constitutionality than by use of Su
defaultpreme or Constitutional Courts with strike down powers a
defaultlong German or USA lines.
default 
defaultIt would depend who was in charge of drafting a Constitution. 
defaultIf an independent body
default were in charge of the exercise
default, 
defaulte.g
default a Royal Commission, they would be expected to hold seminars with judges (and other ‘stakeholders’
default)
default on the issues early on, and to go out to consultation before and after producing a draft Constitution. Heads of judiciaries  (UK, English, Scottish and Northern Ireland) 
defaultand judges 
defaultat various levels (the Supreme Court, in England the Court of Appeal, High Court, County Court, Crown Court, magistrates and Tribunals and their equivalents i
defaultn Scotland and Northern Ireland)
default would be invited to comment. No doubt many practitioners and academics, and representative bodies like the Inns of Court, the Bar Council, and the Law Society
default (and their equivalents in Scotland and NI)
default would also make representations on these issues.
defaultSee my responses to question 1
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultIf the codified constitution explicitly bound the UK and the UK Parliament not to breach the provisions of the European Court of Human Rights (as the devolution Acts bind the devolved bodies) and 
defaultauthorised
default the Supreme Court or other courts to strike down such laws, then the doctrine of sovereignty would have holes in it.
default&#xa0;
defaultIf
default in addition
default our courts had the power to strike down a provision in an Act of Parliament on grounds of unconstitutionality, this would alter fundamentally the concept of Parliament as ‘sovereign’. Some would interpret this as a shift from parliamentary sovereignty to constitutional supremacy. 
default(This shift is taking place in Israel.)
default&#xa0;
defaultIf on the other hand the codified constitution 
defaultauthorised
default the courts to make 
defaultdeclarations
default as to the constitutionality or compliance with the ECHR of provisions in Acts, this would not breach the doctrine of supremacy. 
defaultPoliticians might be annoyed but the remedy would be in their hands – amendment of the Constitution or a provision in an Act of Parliament.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe position is already that our courts will give direct effect to European laws, and will prefer EU laws to UK laws where there is incompatibility. This is required by EU law and is 
defaultauthorised
default by the ECA 1972.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is unusual in common law systems of former dominions for there to be pre-promulgation reference procedures. Such a power does exist in Canada in certain circumstances (e.g. in relation to reform of the Senate): the problem in Canada is that there are seven different procedures for amending the constitutional text so disputes can arise over which procedure is appropriate when amendment is being considered. Reference procedures do exist in relation to devolution to Scotland, Wales
default and Northern Ireland.
defaultMany other constitutions
default provide for such pre-promulgation references
default. The Finnish President may refer a bill to the Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court for opinions on their constitutional compatibility before promulgation. The Swedish Supreme Court and Supreme Administrative Court may be asked for their opinions on the constitutional compatibility of bills – including whether the correct legislative or amendmen
defaultt procedures are being followed. T
defaulthis works well
default in those countries
default.
defaultIt could and should be part of the 
defaultSupreme Court. There would not 
defaultbe sufficient work for it to be a separate court (unless the same judges were in both the Supreme Court and the Constitutional Court). The legitimacy of a constitutional court in the UK would be undermined if appointments were political.
default Many other to
defaultp courts in liberal democracies
default have jurisdiction in relation to both constitutional and other, e.g. private law, cases.
defaultSee parts of my answers to questions above.
defaultThe top courts in many such countries have been quite inventive in ‘discovering
default’ constitutional principles which,
default though not explicit in the text of the Constitution are nevertheless impl
defaulticit. For instance:
defaultIn fact it may be a characteristic of top courts in countries with written (and 
defaultuncodified
default – see New Zealand and Israel) constitutions to develop constitutional principles outside their constitutional texts, whether in Constitutions or important Acts having constitutional significance.
default16 December 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default