&#xa0;
defaultFurther written evidence from Chris Hobbs [CST0043]default&#xa0;defaultPlease note this is my second evidence submission to the Public Administration Select Committee which I have compiled in relation to the 
defaultfurther hearing in relation to 
defaultalleged crime
default figure manipulation by police
default. I understand that this hearing will be 
defaultheld on the 8
defaultth
default of January 2014 during which
default evidence will be heard from Stephen 
defaultGreenhalgh
default, 
defaultSir 
defaultBernard Hogan-Howe, Tom Winsor and Olivia 
defaultPinkney
default. 
default 
defaultI hope this submission will be available to PASC members before the hearing as it anticipates some of the 
defaultassertions that will be made by those appearing before it and provides additional disturbing information obtained from serving front line officers.
defaultAs the hearing progresses 
defaultthere will be reassurances 
defaultfrom the Met representatives that
default wi
defaultll doubtless involv
defaulte 
defaultphrases which will include the words ‘robust’, 
default‘rigorous, 
default‘integrity’ and 
default‘
defaultcrime registrar.
default’
default Stephen 
defaultGreenhalgh
default will probably repeat the assertion that his own auditors will be ‘looking at the books’ to determine that
default the recording of crime is 
defaultaccurate. 
defaultRank and file officers know only too well that the ‘devil lies in the detail’ and that only by examining the minutiae in the body of the crime reports, will it be possible to detect dubious crime recording. This will vary from borough to borough within th
defaulte Met and quite possible from supervisor to supervisor. Those, such as outside auditors, not familiar with police parlance, procedures and the law will not be able to detect such nuances.
defaultThose in the best position to articulate dubious practices are front
default line rank and file officers who take reports from the public. 
defaultMost will now not even attempt to ‘buck the system’ and will simply record the entry as they know the crime managers will wish it to be recorded. Thus robbery will frequently be recorded as the
defaultft person unless the circumstances make it impracticable to do so. 
defaultThis would be the case in the event of serious injury or clear evidence of a weapon
default,
default such as a knife
default,
default being used. 
defaultThe most recent Met staff 
defaultsatisfaction 
defaultsurvey,
default as the Commissioner would h
defaultave to agree, shows an alarming lack of confidence by rank 
defaultand file
default 
defaultofficers in
default Met ACPO ranked management. The figures would probably be worse were it not for the fact that many officers do not trust the ‘guaranteed anonymity’ of such surveys. Similar res
defaultults can be seen in respect of many other UK forces.
defaultEven allowing f
defaultor doubts by officers in relati
defaulton to
default anonymity, it would perhaps be a
defaultn interesting exercise for the Met C
defaultommissioner 
defaultor MOPAC 
defaultto conduct an 
defaultonline independent survey 
defaultamongst 
defaultfront line rank and file officers as to a) whether they believe crime figures are manipulated b) their ‘evidence’ for such a belief. 
defaultLast year, whilst in a 
defaultLondon 
defaultp
defaultound shop, I became aware of a commotion and realised that a young male was complaining tha
defaultt his phone had been stolen by stealth. One of the two suspects had left the store with the phone. The young male attempted to detain the other and was punched in the face causing a visible bleeding wound. I saw the suspect flee the shop as I 
defaultwas 
defaulttelephoni
defaultng police. 
defaultI drove round in a police vehicle looking for the second suspect without success. I was i
defaultnformed by the officer 
defaultthat the matter would be recorded as a 
default‘
defaulttheft and assault
default’
default rather than the more 
defaultserious robbery
default. I later checked the definition of r
defaultobbery together with several ‘case stated’ 
defaulthearings 
defaultand there is no doubt that this incident comfortably comes within the robbery definition. 
defaultP
defaultresumably this ‘theft and assault’ would be buried within the ‘theft other’ figures rather than 
defaultamongst those ca
defaultrrying 
defaultthe ‘theft person’ definition.
default It is ‘theft person’ category 
defaulthowever 
defaultwhere front line office
defaultrs
default allege many robbery offences are placed. As can be seen
default from Attachment 1
default,
default there were nearly 50,000 
default‘
defaulttheft person
default’
default reports and given the different variations in policy amongst boroughs and individuals, these would have to be examined in depth to separate 
defaultrobbery offences from 
defaultthe genuine theft p
defaultersons, 
defaulti.e.
default ‘phone 
defaultsnatches’ and
default 
defaultpick pocketing/’dipping’ 
defaultoffences,
default which
default is another strand of ‘theft person
default;
default’ 
defaultthat is of course 
defaultwhere such thefts are not entered into ‘property lost in the street’ records. 
defaultTo a non police auditor, it may well be that placing crimes, such as the one I partially witnessed, into the lesser categ
defaultory, would be quite acceptable. 
defaultRecently
default I spoke to two officers who have
default spent some years on a local plain clothes squad dealing with street robberies.  
defaultThey were quite used to recording robberies as lesser offences but pointe
defaultd out that when a suspect fo
defaultr a robbery offence
default,
default 
defaultwhich would
default normally be reported as a theft person or theft and assault, was actually arrested at or near the scene, then the offence would be recorded as a robbery as it would show a 
defaultmore serious 
defaultrobbery clear up. 
defaultThe next piece of i
defaultnformation from the officers stretched my credulity to the limit. The fact that one officer is a personal friend who joined the Met just weeks before me is the only reason why I feel confident 
defaultto include it
default as fact. 
defaultIt would seem that if a suspect is arre
defaultsted for a street robbery then not only is the individual robbed shown as the victim, but also included are his/her companions or other witnesses in close proximity to the incident, thus this would show as two, three, four robbery ‘clear ups’ as opposed to
default one. 
defaultThis would not apply where 
defaultthe suspect was not apprehended. T
defaulthe
default individual robbed would be shown as the only victim with the possibility that the robbery could be recorded as a theft person or theft assault. 
default Witnesses would not be included as victi
defaultms. 
defaultSadly, such is the climate of fear within the Met that exists in relation to any officer who be considered a ‘whistleblower
default,
default’ I am unable to name even the borough 
defaultwhere 
defaultthese of
defaultficers perform duty 
defaultin case this leads to their identification. 
defaultWhilst ACPO ranked officers and PCC’s will officially ‘deplore’ any crime figure manipulation and 
defaultwhereas 
defaultthe Home office have ‘abolished’ targets, huge pressure exists on Met borough commanders 
defaultof Chief Superintendent rank 
defaultto reduce crime figures. 
defaultTales 
defaultof ‘wire type’ grilling administered by certain known ACPO officers 
defaultabound throughout the Met and 
defaultare far too common to be
default 
defaultdismissed as 
default‘Chinese whispers.’ Chief Superintendent’s have been reduced to tears and indeed removed from their post
defaults
default for failing to
default bring those figures down. Bewildered officers at one west London borough came under the command of th
defaultree Chief Superintendents during a period of 
defaultseveral weeks
default.
defaultThis inevitably leads to downward pressure by Chief Superintendents upon their police supervis
defaultory managers 
defaultwho themselves feel that it is incumbent upon them to reduce crime figures if they wish to remain in post and/or advance their careers.
defaultThe question of ‘
defaultwhistleblowing
default’ and indeed any conscientious form of 
defaultdissent,
default as illustrated by the previo
defaultus 
defaultPASC hearing
default,
default is clearly linked to the manipulation of crime figures. The assertion in the 
defaultMet’s
default recently
default issued code of conduct in respect of pro
defaulttection of 
defaultwhistleblowers
default has been
default greeted with derision by rank and file officers.
defaultI have absolutely no do
defaultubt that if the question of ‘
defaultwhistleblowing
default’ was added to any crime figure manipulation survey, as described above, more that 90% of rank and file officers would state that they would not have any faith in the syst
defaultem other than in the most obvious 
defaultcases (m
defaultoney being accepted from criminal elements in return for ‘favours’ or indeed money accepted from journalists). 
defaultThe key question is how crime figure manipulation can be identified and dealt with given the fact that dubious practises have continued for deca
defaultdes. Using 
default police officers or police staff as crime registrars, hiring independent auditors who are unfamiliar with the vagaries of police crime reporting  using police or PCC funds or even 
defaultutilising 
defaultHMIC staff again who in all probability will be equally
default unfamiliar with the above mentioned vagaries, will do little to inspire confidence.
defaultThe answer perhaps lies with those former and current officers who have previously given evidence of crime figure manipulation and together with those of ACPO rank who 
defaultuse
default both overt and 
defaultdubious 
defaultfurtive
default methods to discourage whistleblowers whilst publically stating the opposite.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default