&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the Police and Crime Commissioner for South Wales [CST0045]default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultThe
default 2013/14
default targets for South Wales Police were set against the background of the very short timescales I had to prepare and publish my Police and Crime Reduction Plan. Current targets are based on supporting the delivery of the plan and provide a clear line of sight
default through the Force Delivery Plan to divisional and departmental plans within South Wales Police.
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, since being elected I have been able to review the process and a revised
default performance monitoring framework
default has been developed as a joint approach with
default the Chief Constable, taking careful consideration of the 
defaultstatutory requirements
default of not just holding him to account, but also the accountability of partners within the Criminal Justice System, and the partnership landscape as a whole. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThis has led to a m
defaultore mature approach to monitoring performance, because the priorities within the Police and Crime Reduction Plan cover a variety of areas and it is apparent that the responsibility for delivery of the plan does not fall at the door of the police alone.
default 
defaultThi
defaults has produced a more dynamic, co-operative and layered approach, providing clear accountability for delivering priorities and responsibility for the provision of performance information.  It is not just about targets but also about getting behind the figu
defaultres to understand trends, context and accountability and, most importantly, to ensure that activity is driven by the need to deliver high quality and consistent services to 
defaultt
defaulthe public.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are a number of key elements to this approach. The first is the 
defaultestablishment of my Commissioner’s Strategic Board, which meets monthly and the minutes are made public.  Performance monitoring is a standing agenda item.
default&#xa0;
defaultReporting to the Strategic Board is a newly established Joint Performance Management Group, attende
defaultd by my Deputy and Assistant Commissioners,  , which has become the keystone for driving the evolution towards a new performance management framework. It is responsible for scrutinising performance and identifying any areas that need to be escalated to the
default Strategic Board for further discussion. This joint approach provides an opportunity for the Commissioner’s and Chief Constable’s leadership teams to develop a positive dialogue on understanding the issues behind the figures, and resolving performance issu
defaultes
default&#xa0;
defaultAnother key component is an agreed programme of thematic reviews which will focus on specific areas to provide a greater understanding of issues. These reviews will involve “task and finish” groups led by a Chief Officer 
defaultand a member of my leadership t
defaulteam. It will
default consist of a small team of subject matter experts and external stakeholders who will report back to the Commissioner’s Strategic Board, providing key recommendations to inform decision-making. Key to this approach will be the scrutiny of the c
defaulturrent set of measures and targets for each specific areas and the ability to propose new measures that will drive performance improvements.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAgreed areas for thematic review for years 2013/14 and 2014/15 include (
defaulti
default) violence against women and girls, (ii
default) hate crime, (iii) response to anti-social behaviour and (iv) equality and diversity.  The Joint Performance Management 
defaultGroup will
default recommend further areas for review as and when needed.
default&#xa0;
defaultFuture targets will be based on the principles of:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWith regard to crime recording practices, the current performance dashboard contains the latest 
defaultHome Office National Crime Recording Standards
default performance levels and these are discussed at the Joint Planning and Performance Group.
default&#xa0;
defaultOn the wider partnership level I am able to monitor performance through regional forums such as Safer South Wales and the South Wales Criminal Justice Board. These fo
defaultrums provide opportunities to identify and share best practice across partner agencies but also provide further governance arrangements to test performance and provide an element of consistency in delivering services across 
defaultSouth Wales
default.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are a number of approaches I use to inform my overall assessment of the integrity of crime recording in South Wales
default. As mentioned above, performance
default against the Home Office standards
default is assessed at the monthly Joint Planning and Performance Board, prior to which this area is discussed at monthly 
defaultF
defaultorce 
defaultCompStat
default performance meetings. Any issues are then escalated to the 
defaultmonthly Strategic Commissioner’s Board. 
defaultIn addition there are both internal and external audit mechanisms which are designed to ensure compliance and provide independent scrutiny. For example, 
defaulta 
defaultCrime Registry Unit
default has been established by the Chief Consta
defaultble.  Key functions of this unit are to monitor and check to ensure that crime recording complies with Home Office guidance and to give advice and guidance.  The unit 
defaultundertakes frequent audits on crime recording compliance
default and 
defaultreports
default findings to 
defaultC
defaulthief 
defaultOf
defaultficers.
defaultI am also linking 
defaultwith 
defaultHMIC
default to ensure that our respective oversight responsibilities complement each other.  I am aware that HMIC 
defaultis currently undertaking an inspection on crime data integrity
default.  I shall give the findings careful consideration and 
defaultagree with the Chief Constable appropriate monitoring arrangements in respect of any improvements required.   
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default