&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence from the Police and Crime Commissioner for West Yorkshire [CST0046]default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultWhat, if any, targets do you set for your police force? What impact do you think this has on police recording crime practices?default&#xa0;defaultOnly one target has been set for the police force for 2013/14, and that is around reducing the risk of domestic burglary. 
defaultThe target is for performance to be better than similar forces and partnerships. Only one target area was chosen to reflect the significance of the problem faced by the communities of West Yorkshire in terms of the volume of domestic burglaries.
default A number o
defaultf other performance indicators are being tracked for change over time 
defaultand
default in agreement with the Chief Constable some challenging internal police force ambitions have been agreed across a range of indicators.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the past there have been issues where settin
defaultg targets has become a perverse incentive. As an example the old Police Authority set a target to increase the sanction detection rate for domestic violence cases. There was concern that this incentivised police officers to proceed with cases despite poor 
defaultquality evidence. Therefore the impact – 
defaulteither intentional or
default unintentional – 
defaultof 
defaultany targets set need
defaults
default to be carefully considered.
default&#xa0;defaultHow do you assure yourself that the recorded crime figures for your area are correct? To what extent can you trust the crimdefaulte statistics for your area?default&#xa0;defaultPrimarily external inspections by bodies such as the Audit Commission or HMIC have been relied upon to provide reassurance that recorded crime figures are correct. However since recent HMI
defaultC inspections that have raised 
defaultconcerns
default over 
defaultsome aspects of crime recording
default I have instructed my Internal Audit function to undertake an audit into crime recording, and have been briefed on 
defaultissues identified internally, 
defaultchanges 
defaultneeded 
defaultand improvements 
defaultmade 
defaultto crime recording by the Chief Const
defaultable via 
defaultthe 
defaultvarious mechanisms that I use to hold him to account. I am interested to see the results from the current HMIC crime recording inspection – which I fully expect to show some 
defaultareas for improvement
default 
default–
default 
defaultbut feel that West Yorkshire Police is well on its way to improving its crime recording practices. 
defaultThis will remain a key focus for both myself and the Chief Constable.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default