&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the Police and Crime Commissioner for Wiltshire and Swindon [CST0049]default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultCrimedefault Statisticsdefault&#xa0;
defaultThank you for your letter of 6
defaultth
default December 2013. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMy Police and Crime Plan, which is available on the OPCC website (www-wiltshire.pcc.gov.uk) speaks of priorities, objectives and key initiatives.  I have been consistently reluctant to set targets given the inherent problems they entail.  The target for th
defaulte number of offenders brought to justice is a prime example.  In order to 
defaultchase
default the target police officers effectively abandoned their discretion in relation to low-level offences.  A generation of younger people was disproportionally criminalised and the 
defaultcriminal justice system creaked under the weight of inappropriate cases.  Similarly, a rigid target to answer non-emergency calls within 30 seconds led inevitably 
defaultto 
defaultover stretched call takers dumping calls on inappropriate extensions where the wrong perso
defaultn answered or no-one answered the calls at all.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere does however have to be some method by which I can judge, and the public at election time can judge, whether we are going in the right direction.  I have therefore set what I term thresholds.  These ar
defaulte the levels across a range of indicators whe
defaultre
default 
defaultI
default would expect performance to sit.  They are intended to encourage management and 
defaultthe workforce alike to concentrate on
default the right areas and to 
defaultdo 
defaultso diligently.  Both I, and the performance team that advises 
defaultme, are alert to the possibility of counter
default-
defaultproductive performance monitoring.  Along with the Chief Constable, I believe that we are achieving the right balance.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs regards the integrity of recorded crime figures, I and my staff have full access to the c
defaultrime registrar.  We watch crime trends carefully and 
defaultalways consider the possibility
default that a recording practice has varied if we see significant change.  
defaultI am setting up an independent panel of volunteers to dip sample cases where a re
defaultsolution outside the c
defaultriminal justice system has been recorded. It may be possible to extend this to a more general check and test of recording policy. However this can only be an additional safeguard and public reassurance
default. We do, in my view, need a robust inspection framework
default. A portion of my budget is spent on audit and inspection, as you will be aware. Whilst I would not be willing to pay more, I believe the auditing of crime 
defaultrecording practice
default should be a core function of HMIC
default. Their resources should be directed far more cl
defaultosely on this area, unglamorous though it may be. In years past I recall regular national audits for crime recording. Problems that are surfacing in different parts of the country may have been avoided had this regime not been discontinued.
default&#xa0;
defaultI hope this is
default of use to you and your members
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default