              
default  
default                                
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from NASSdefault&#xa0;defaultBackground to Briefing Notedefault&#xa0;
defaultNASS, 
defaultthe only national umbrella body for special schools outside Local Authority control, is delighted
default that
default 
defaultthe Education Committee 
defaultis 
defaultundertaking an inquiry into residential children’s 
defaulthomes
default. 
defaultNASS is a national membership organisation for Independent and Non-Maintained Special Schools.  We have over 220 members – almost 50% of these are registered as children’s homes
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAs you may recall, Claire Dorer, Chief Executive of NASS, gave evidence to the 
defaultEducation Committee as part of their inquiry. 
defaultHowever, since 
defaultthen 
defaultthe Government has published its response to the consultation on residential care reform and NASS would like to
default highlight a couple of concerns we have with the proposed reforms
default ahead of your session with Children’s Minister Edward Timpson MP
default. 
defaultNASS would like to put on record that we would have 
defaultpreferred the Government to have 
defaultwaited until the Education Committee’s 
defaultinquiry was concluded before publishing their response. 
default&#xa0;defaultNew homes in safe areasdefault&#xa0;
defaultThe Government have confirmed plans to change
default regulations so 
defaultthat 
defaultnew homes 
defaultwill 
defaultonly open in 
default“
defaultsafe
default”
default areas, run by competent providers and ensuring homes already open in less safe areas evidence that they can keep children safe, or face closure
default. 
defaultWe would like to put on record that r
defaultegulations can be valuable in setting “absolutes” which must be followed.
default However, they are crude instruments in effecting long-lasting cultural change. Change in the residential child care system will not occur through regulation alone and specifically not regulation which largely focuses on the responsibilities of homes thems
defaultelves
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would like to stress that r
defaultesidential 
defaultc
defaulthild 
defaultc
defaultare is a complex system where factors beyond what goes on in the homes have a significant impact on the sector. For example, because of the high cost of property, new homes will be more likely to 
defaultlocate in relatively cheaper areas and some areas, especially in London, will struggle to attract new providers. Risk assessing an area offers something in some circumstances but covers one dimension in a wider issue.
default Currently no children's home can feel 
defaultsafe secure and cared for because of the many pressures, especially those concerni
defaultng finance and regulation, that
default 
defaultare being applied to them.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would question the practicalities of this proposal and specifically how Local Authorities will determine that 
defaultplacements are in “safe”
default 
defaultareas? 
defaultWe would also like to raise the issue that if a
default previously safe area is identified as now being potentially unsafe, what is reasonable action to take? A very small home might feasibly consider relocation. However, a 120 plac
defaulte school, additionally registered as a children’s home, with a 100 year plus history, land, buildings and upwards of 300 staff could not move. Whilst it could be potentially useful to better understand your area, it is not likely that it is within an indiv
defaultidual home’s ability to be 
defaultable to mitigate against all identified risks. It is unclear whether this would be considered an acceptable position or if the home would be considered as negligent.
default&#xa0;defaultQuestions to ask Edward Timpson MPdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultOut of area placementsdefault&#xa0;
defaultUnder proposals by the Government
default only senior council officials in charge of children’s services will be able to place children out of area and only when they judge it to be the right decision for a child to be moved away from their home area.
default&#xa0;
defaultThough th
defaultis
default pr
defaultoposal has good intentions, we
default fear that it will add another layer of 
defaultbureaucracy
default which
default could mitigate against young people
default receiving their entitlements.  
defaultLocal Authorities need to have robust regimes for the identification, assessment, planning, delivery, monitoring and evaluation and
default to be able to justif
defaulty them in Ofsted Inspections.  
defaultThis measure will do nothing to attend to the deve
defaultlopment of strategic commission
default that should deliver the right placement at the right time for the right child.  We are already encountering unintended con
defaultsequences from thinking that prioritises local placement. We need local, regional and national to be firmly delivering safety, choice and specialism. Out of area placements may be well justified. The pressure on Local Authorities to place within their own 
defaultboundaries can act counter to meeting the needs of a young person. 
defaultQuestions to ask Edward Timpson MPdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultAdefaultbout usdefault&#xa0;defaultThe National Association of Independent Schools and Non-Maintained Special Schools (NASS) is a membership organisation catering for approximately 6,000 very vulnerable children and young people in over 210 schools and organisati
defaultons. It provides information, support and training to its members to advance the education of children and young people with SEN. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1
default | 
defaultPage
default&#xa0;
default