&#xa0;
defaultWdefaultritten evidence defaultfrom the default Police &amp; Crime Commissionerdefault for Sussex [CST0051]default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultFurther to 
defaultt
defaulthe
default Public Administration 
defaultSelect
default Committee Inquiry into 
defaultCrime Statistics
default, Katy Bourne, the Sussex Police &amp; Crime Commissioner, would like to make the following response.
default&#xa0;
defaultWhat, if any, targets do you set for yourdefault police force? What impact do you think this has on police recording crime practices?default&#xa0;defaultSussex Police Authority had 18 targets in their 2012
default/2013 Local Policing Plan
default. 
defaultTo an extent these targets dictated specific activity and 
defaultunhelpfully 
defaultincentivised police officers to pursue particular outcomes and crime types ahead of others. 
defaultBy contrast, the
default Commissioner
default’s Police &amp; Crime Plan has removed these targets and the associated performance pressures they bring. There is now an emphasis on strengthening police of
defaultficer discretion to focus activity around local priorities 
defaultw
defaulthich differ by district and division. 
default&#xa0;
defaultMrs Bourne acknowledges that t
defaulthis approach empowers 
defaultlocal District Commanders
default and staff 
defaultwith greater 
defaultdiscretion 
defaultto exercise their professional judgement to ensure that offenders are dealt with by the most appropriate disposal available, in the knowledge that no one outcome is favoured over others. Strengthening police officer 
defaultand staff 
defaultdiscretion should in turn promote a more victim
default-
defaultfocussed
default approach, 
defaultdetermined to
default provid
defaulte
default a better service to victims of crime by removing perverse incentives for forces to record and pro-actively pursue certain crimes on the basis of locally-set detection targets, and encouraging officers
default and staff
default to consider the needs of victims, and the potential for engaging them in the process. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Commissioner appreciates that t
defaultargets can provide a useful method of measuring performance in terms of evaluating the effectiveness and appropriateness of the allocation of resources across different activities and crime types. However, local priorities will vary from one district to another (as described above). It is also worth emphasising that Sussex Police are still monitoring their performance internally which is set out in th
defaulteir Operational Delivery Plan and the Commissioner keeps a close watch on this performance.
default&#xa0;
defaultHow do you assure yourself that the recorded crime figures for your area are correct? To what extent can you trust the crime statistics for your area?default&#xa0;defaultThe Commissioner is 
defaultreassured
default that the crimes in Sussex are being recorded and categorised correctly
default which ensures 
defaultintegrity of the data
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultMrs Bourne has recently met with Superintendent Samantha Coates, Force Crime Intelligence, and Mr George Welch, Force Crime Registrar to discuss recorded crime in Sussex. The Commissioner will continue to closely monitor this area at her monthly Performance &amp; Accountability Meetings (PAMs) with the Chief Constable. These PAMs are webcast online and available to 
defaultview on 
defaultwww.sussex-pcc.gov.uk
default.
default              
default   
default&#xa0;
defaultMrs Bourne appreciates that Sussex Police have endeavoured to improve the integrity of their recorded crime by changing the culture within the Force from the top down (in
defaultcluding the removal of targets). This has also included improving the 
defaultsystems and processes
default in place, including the implementation of Niche, which brings together all of the 
defaultcrime data and 
defaultinformation in one place and enables 
defaultofficers and staff to work with increased 
defaultflexib
defaulti
defaultl
defaultit
defaulty.
default 
defaultIn addition, 
defaultofficers and staff 
defaulthave been provided with
default 
defaultfurther traini
defaultng to improve
default their
default skill levels using the new 
defaultsystems and 
defaultprocesses, together with increased discretion for officers and staff. 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Commissioner is confident that the crime recording practices within Sussex
default Police are increasingly victim-
defaultfocussed because every report is treated as a crime in the first instance, until it is proved otherwise. However, there is an obvious continuum between what is and what is not a crime and elements of subjectivity, in between. This ensures that officers and staff are not fixated on chasing obtuse targets but there are risks associated with increased officer and staff discretion which need to be managed accordingly.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default