&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by defaultADCS defaultThe Association of Directors of Children's Services 
default(ADCS) 
defaultvalues the
default opportunity to respond to the c
defaultall for evidence by the Education 
defaultSelect Committee on the Ofsted Social Care Annual Report 2012 – 1
default3
default.  
defaultADCS is the professional association for directors of children's services an
defaultd their senior management teams.
default 
defaultUnder the Children Act 2004, the DCS
default 
defaultis
default the 
defaultchief
default officer responsible for the 
defaultdischarge of local authority functions for children’s social care
default. T
defaulthe DCS provides a clear and unambiguous line of 
defaultprofessional
default accountability for children’s services as well
default being 
defaultprofessional
defaultly responsible
default for the leadership, strategy and effectiveness of local authority children’s services and, as such, has a particular interest in the 
defaultpublication of the Ofsted Social Care Annual Report. 
defaultADCS 
defaultbelieve
defaults
default that inspection
default, by Ofsted
default, of the local authority, has
default the potential to be helpful
default if it supports improvement in outcomes f
defaultor children and their families and 
defaultour response is set in this context.
default2012 – 13 was the first year that the Ofsted Annual Report has been split into two separate publications, one encom
defaultpassing 
defaultsocial care exclusively and another, published in early December 2013, focusing predominantly on the education aspect of Ofsted’s remit. It is not clear what benefit this brings to the workforce
default or the public
default, but the publication of two reports 
defaultsep
defaultarating the local authority’s work in respect of children’s social care from that of its role in quality assuring  school standards
default, does not reflect the co-dependencies that exist
default 
defaultwhen improving outcomes for children and young people.
defaultA
defaultDCS welcomes Ofsted
default’s focus on improving standards in children’s social care. All directors of children’s services
default, whether their services have been judged
default by Ofs
defaultt
defaulted
default to be 
default‘
defaultoutstanding
default’
default or 
default‘
defaultinadequate
default’
default, are committed to improving services for the children in their local area. 
defaultOn publication of the Ofsted Annual Report, Sir Michael
default Wilshaw
default called for 
default“strong and stable leadership to bring about sustained improvement in the help
default,
default care and protection of ou
defaultr most vulnerable young people”, ADCS agrees with this laudable aim and acknowledges the crucial 
defaultrole of
default strong and stable leadership teams, not exclusively the director of children’s services but also the wider management team
default,
default in delivering good, sustain
defaultable services. Yet 
defaultOfsted's approach to inspection, namely the single word judgment, is not conducive to 
defaultleadership stability
default. A judgment of inadequate
default after the inspection of local authority children’s services
default, and the subsequent instability this can cau
defaultse, can be detrimental to the improvement journey of a local authority.
default In one local authority, the vacancy rate amongst children’s social workers 
defaultincreased from 4% to 40% after a judgment of “inadequate”. Other children’s services departments, such as Bir
defaultmingham City Council, 
defaulthave publically stated the impact that staff 
defaultvacancies has had when trying to improve their service. 
defaultA 
defaultmove to 
defaultnarrative judgment
defaults, as opposed to a single word judgment,
default would allow local authorities to work with their local partner
defaults
default,
default including health, police and education
default, in a less punitive environment
default to form an action plan to  i
defaultmprove
default services
default in their local area. 
defaultHelping, protecting and caring for vulnerable children, young people and their families is a complex multi agency 
defaultbusiness that is not eased by the febrile climate that children’s services leaders sometimes find themselves in during the immediate aftermath of an ‘inadequate’ inspection judgment.
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default