&#xa0;
[normal]Written evidence submitted by Neil [bold]Shephard[bold], Professor of Economics and of Statistics, Harvard University; Fellow, Nuffield College, Oxford[bold]&#xa0;
[normal]&#xa0;
[normal]I read that your committee is taking some evidence on the recent National Audit Office report on student loans. I have been thinking about the economics of the UK student loan system over the last five years, which covered the last part of my time as a Professor of Economics at Oxford University. I recently moved to a chair at Harvard, I hope that you will be willing to listen to a British voice now located over the pond.
[normal]I have five points to make, the first o
[normal]f which is probably the most important to you at the moment.
[normal]1. The Treasury charges the BIS Departmental accounts 2.2% real on the student loan book. This interest rate is supposed to reflect the long run average borrowing costs the Government faces. I have three sub-points on this:
[normal]a. We now know the borrowing costs the Treasury has actually paid for each cohort of student loan borrowing, as it is determined by the gilts markets at the time the student loans are taken out (i.e. when the Government borrowed the money to give to the students). We can compute the interest rate by matching the maturity of the corresponding gilts to the maturity of the student loans. We can thus compare these actual borrowing costs to the 2.2% real BIS is being charged. The results are dramatic, long term gilts have interest rates which are far, far lower than this, and have been so for a very long time now. During the recent recession these interest rates were roughly 3%, nominal. If we assume the Bank of England maintains inflation at the announced target of 2%, this is around 1% nominal. Although 2.2% - 1% real does not sound much, when you compound it over 30 years it makes a vast different. It accounts for around 1/3 to 1/2, of the so-called losses on the student loans. The Treasury is overcharging BIS. Put another way, the actual cost to the country of student finance is far lower than reported.
[normal]b. The above is a very significant understatement of the case. Student loan repayments are in effect indexed linked by prices, in the long run, as repayments are a fraction of earnings and the thresholds are indexed as well. Streams of indexed cash flows are, as you know, highly valued by pension companies, etc. As a result typically the real interest rate the Government pays on index linked gilts is even lower and these match more strongly student loan type debts. In recent times index linked bonds have been sold paying roughly 0% real. This not a short term effect, indexed linked financing is cheaper for the government as it does not have to pay the so-called "inflation risk premium" demanded by gilts investors. Again, the Treasury is overcharging BIS.
[normal]c. When you think about student loan funding using indexed linked bonds, it overthrows conventional wisdom that BIS would be better off by holding these loans to maturity as the Government can more cheaply borrow than the private sector as the private sector will demand a "risk premium" due to future real incomes being uncertain in the future. The private sector will indeed charge this premium, but pension companies (for example) may be willing to hold these kinds of index linked funds at a price below 2.2% real due to their inflation characteristics. Hence it is a practical issue of obtaining a good price as to whether it is a good idea for BIS to sell off these loans to the private sector.
[normal]2. I do believe that BIS is overcharged by the Treasury. However, the reality is that this funding system is at risk if graduate real earnings disappoint compared to what we expect over the next 30 years. It is important to understand that this is true for the entire tax base --- and so impacts all forms of possible student funding methods (e.g. graduate taxes or old fashioned grants). Obviously the UK has experienced a very significant fall in its total income and it would be amazing if graduates were not affected by this in the long run (although they are likely to be effected less than non-graduates are in the long-run). The IFS and BIS models have been tracking the likely impact of this on long-run repayment rates. I regard their work as being carried out professionally to a high standard. In my experience they are intellectually open to explaining their models and interested in new ideas and data. It might be useful for them to publish estimates of how their estimated loss rates change with disappointments (or positive surprises) in future real earnings (i.e. the derivative of the loss with respect to the average real earnings growth rate over the period of the loan).
[normal]Perhaps this would moderate some of the silly newspaper headlines and press releases from various unthinking education think tanks each time OBR updates its growth figures about the likely effect on the expected losses on the loan book. Like most academic economists, I am disappointed the 21k repayment threshold is so high and it may be prudent for the Government to continue to freeze this in nominal terms for quite some period of time given UK earnings are lower than we expected. Further, I would prefer it if the interest rate subsidies provided for year by year lower earners were removed so the system was much simpler (this has no impact at all on low lifetime earners).
[normal]3. My main other worries about the current system are about incentives. HEIs are incentivised to raise their fees to the 9k cap (which is severely and unnecessarily burdensome for the loan system --- I have written about this previously in a paper with Nick Barr), while graduates have a 9% additional marginal rate of income tax of their earnings at least during the early parts of their careers. The UK already has a high marginal rate of tax on moderate earners and high marginal rates reduce the incentive to work or relocate to take promotions, etc. It would be better economically to have a lower threshold and a lower marginal repayment rate, e.g. a threshold of 15k and a marginal repayment rate as low as is financially feasible (e.g. 5%), until an income of 40k, say, has been reach where the marginal rate would go up to 12%, say. The higher repayment rate for higher earners should not have an incentive problem, as higher earners will be repaying the loans in full so earning more will repay the loan faster. My concern is with lower earners and their behaviour on the margin where decisions are made. Finally, the 30 term of student loans does not reflect modern careers and could be more like 45 years (or more logically generally indexed to state pension ages, so a one year increase in the slate pension age leads to a one year increase in the period of the loan).
[normal]4. It is unclear to me why the loans continue to be income contingent when a graduate ceases to be tax resident within the UK (or at least the EU). The loan is described as income contingent, but in principle it has two different aspects which are intellectually separate: a standard loan and an income contingent form of insurance (so that graduates do not have to pay more than 9% of income above a threshold and the loan is forgiven after 30 years). This latter part provides the graduate with a valuable form of insurance paid for by the UK stale, but it is unclear to me why the state should provide non-residents with this privilege. I would have thought non-residents should not qualify for the insurance and so their loans would just be mortgage style loans. If people return from abroad and become tax resident then again they could be covered by the insurance scheme.
[normal]5. Finally, in all of these discussions about student loans, it is important to keep an eye on the big picture. If the state provides resources to allow an individual to choose to educate themselves and this raises their average incomes, the state will gain an enormous windfall. This will not appear in the BIS budget, but accrue to the Treasury.
[normal]Given the UK's high rates of marginal income tax and high rates of consumption taxes (principally VAT), it is not an unreasonable approximation to think the state will receive at least 50% of any additional income generated by the graduate educated individual, year after year (including into retirement where defined contribution pensions will be boosted by higher earlier incomes and then taxed as income as they are paid out). These quantum are likely to dwarf the losses on the loan book commonly discussed, even using a 2.2% real interest rate. The real policy question is always the same: will the UK gain economically from having a more educated workforce in the future and what kind of mix of education do we want.
[normal]I hope this is of some help to you and your committee colleagues.
[normal]Kind regards
[normal]Neil 
[normal]Shephard
[normal]Professor of Economics and of Statistics, Harvard University;
[normal]Fellow, Nuffield College, Oxford
[normal]&#xa0;
[normal]