&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the Police and Crime Commissioner for Cambridgeshire [CST0060]default&#xa0;defaultThank you for the opportunity to respond to the questions within your letter of 6
defaultth
default December 2013 to inform the Public Administration Select Committee inquiry on crime statistics.  As you noted in your letter, I have already given oral evidence to the Home Affairs Select Committee on the 26
defaultth
default November 2013, where the Committee heard evidence on crime recording and statistics. 
defaultQ1default              defaultWhat, if any, targets do you set your police force?defaultAs I stated to the Home Affairs Select Committee, I have gone to great lengths not to set targets. Statistics are not a measure; the overall measure and response as to whether crime is coming down is broader than statistics.  The ultimate measure which is important to both myself and the public is to reduce crime. 
defaultQ2default              defaultWhat impact do you think this has on police recording crime practices?defaultThere is always the potential that 
defaultsetting targets can have the effect of pressurising people into false recording practices
default.  T
defaulthe fact that we have no targets in Cambridgeshire 
defaulttends 
defaultto
defaultwards me considering o
defaultur recording practices are probably more accurate. 
defaultQ3default              defaultHow do you assure yourself that the recorded crime figures for your areas are correct?defaultI seek and gain assurance through a number of means.   I hold the Chief Constable to account for Force performance through
default 
defaultan effective and transparent business forum for senior level officers of my office and the Force.  I have confidence in the scrutiny processes in place within Cambridgeshire Constabulary which includes a unit dedicated to ensuring crimes are accurately recorded and a data integrity working group overseen by the ACC Operations. 
default I have also met with the Crime Registrar and her colleague 
defaultin order for me to better understand both the auditing process and rigour with which it is followed. 
defaultI also rely on the HMIC through their inspection, monitoring and advisory role. 
defaultPrior to me taking up office, in January 2012 HMIC reported on their inspection of Cambridgeshire Constabulary’s crime and incident reports.   HMIC concluded from their sampling that ‘
defaultCambridgeshire Constabulary almost always records crimes accurately as required by the crime recording standards. These standards are championed at chief officer level, and supported by comprehensive plans, policies and strategies. Staff are fully aware of their responsibilities in this area, and quality assurance processes identify any issues to be rectified
default’.  
defaultFurthermore, following the HMIC Crime Data Integrity Inspection of Kent in June 2013, Cambridgeshire Constabulary commissioned an internal audit to ensure it was compliant with the National Crime Recording Standards. 
defaultThe Constabulary have recently introduced another system check whereby the Force Control Room and the Information Management Unit review every incident to scrutinise those that were not recorded and be able to justify the reasoning for this.   Although in its infancy, I welcome this pro-active self-awareness approach which should provide further assurance to the public about the integrity of crime recording.  
defaultAs such, I welcome the current thematic inspection of data integrity by HMIC.  This will be an important step in informing not only me and Cambridgeshire Constabulary but all Police and Crime Commissioners, as to what further work needs to done in this area to assure the public that crime is recorded correctly.
defaultQ4default              defaultTo what extent can you trust the crime statistics for your area? defaultI trust the crime statistics in my area but I am not complacent. Any recording practices of this nature are vulnerable to both intentional and unintentional manipulation. That is why the constabulary has the monitoring processes in place, why the HMIC conducts inspections into it and why I jointly review the issue with the Chief Constable. 
defaultIf you require further details 
defaultplease do not hesitate to contact me.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default