&#xa0;
defaultFurther Written evidence submitted by Monica Waud (LGO18)default&#xa0;
defaultSummarydefaultThe current procedures used by the Ombudsman do not ensure fairness
default and that reassurances provided in the evidence provided in the session on 2 December 2013 do not address the criticisms of the system made by me and others.  A further look at the soundness of the method of evidence gathering used by the Ombudsman and the
default availability of evidence to complainants is essential if the Ombudsman is to meet the test of fairness.
default&#xa0;defaultEvidence regarding fairness given by Dr Martindefault and Mr Kingdefault on 2 December 2013default1.1 I write again in my personal capacity as someone who has had persona
defaultl dealings with the Local Government Ombudsman (LGO) intermittently since 1994.
default&#xa0;
default1.2 I have read the oral evidence given by Dr Martin and Mr King and believe there have been some misunderstandings regarding my previous written evidence which I wish to corr
defaultect.  I also wish to supply 
defaultfurther 
defaultevidence regarding what happens in practice from the complainants’ standpoint because I believe the
default Select Committee (CLG)
default may still 
defaultbe unaware of the lack of fairness in the procedure.
default&#xa0;
default1.
default3
default Mr King
default,
default in response to Q 35
default,
default states that “During an investigation, we will share any key documents with both parties to make sure they have sight of the evidence on which we are relying”.  
defaultIn 2005 I requested sight of the documents relating to my complaints that were held in the Ombu
defaultdsman’s files and was told by an Assistant Ombudsman, Mr R Stephen, that “Under the Local Government Act 1974 (section 32(2)), the Ombudsman is not permitted to disclose any information obtained in the course of, or for the purposes of, the investigation o
defaultf a complaint, unless he or she considers it is necessary for the purposes of the investigation”.  I complained to the Information Commission which confirmed that the Ombudsman did not have to release these d
defaultocuments.  
defaultI have
default therefore
default never had sight of e
defaultvide
defaultnce collected by the Ombudsman from 
defaultoriginal sources such as 
defaultindividual council officers
default 
defaultbut 
defaultwhich have been
default relied upon by 
defaultthe Ombudsman 
defaultwhen reaching a decision.  It is my understanding that all complainants are prevented from seeing such documents. 
default 
default&#xa0;
default1.4 Mr King goes on to say “Before we make a decision, both parties will be consulted on what we call a provisional view. That sets out the decision we are minded to make, and both parties at the same time will have the opportunity to comment on that vi
defaultew.” 
default 
defaultThis provisional view is arrived at when a 
defaultLocal Authority 
default(
defaultLA)
default 
default- 
defaultin my
default experience the Chief Executive - 
defaulthas written back to the Ombudsman giving a response which, if accepted by the Ombudsman, means 
defaultthat no further investigation is carried out by 
defaultthe Ombudsman
default.  The response from the 
defaultLA
default 
defaultis therefore hearsay because the Chief Executive relies on the Strategic Director who in turn relies on the Head of Department.  
defaultThis means that the 
defaultOmbudsman and the 
defaultcomplainant never get to see what 
defaultactual 
defaultevidenc
defaulte/original sources have been relied upon by the Chief Executive
default and other senior officers
default when compiling his response
default if it relates to oral evidence from officers
default.  
default&#xa0;
default1.5 In my earlier submission, I was suggesting at paragraph 2.3 that LAs were required to
default append transcripts of interviews with the officers which took place as part of the LAs own 
defaultinternal
default investigation of a complaint
default.  This should include all interviews that had taken place from the first time the complainant lodged a complaint with the LA r
defaultight up until the complainant reached the end of the LA’s complaint procedure.  The inclusion of these documents providing evidence from original sources 
defaultwould prevent the Chief Executive or any other senior officer responding on the basis of wishful think
defaulting as took place in my case
default.  In addition,
default it would also show 
defaultwhether 
defaultan
defaulty
default investigation 
defaulthad actually been 
defaultcarried out which my case
default would have been useful because it had not
default.
default&#xa0;
default1.6
default 
defaultAfter the Provisional View stage
default referred to by Mr King
default, if the Ombudsman d
defaultecides to 
defaultvisit the Council and interview officers
default rather than discontinue the investigation on the basis of the Chief Executive’s response,
default 
defaultthe secrecy 
default(upheld by the Information Commission) 
defaultsurrounding the
default evidence
default gathered by the Ombudsman means
default 
defaultcomplai
defaultnants
default do not know which officers were interviewed, what 
defaultthey said or whether their evidence was reliable.  
defaultIt is therefore impossible 
defaultfor complainants 
defaultto challenge the 
defaultactual 
defaultevidence in a way that could be considered fair.
default&#xa0;
default1.
default7
default 
defaultIn my case, the 
defaultLA
default mislead 
defaultthe LGO over a number of years and the Head of Department within the LA, who 
defaultunder the LA’s complaints procedure was required to mak
defaulte the first response to my complaints to the LA itself, always rebutted my complaints.  
defaultHis 
defaultfirst response became a template that was 
defaultreplicated 
defaultas my complaint progressed through the LA’
defaults internal complaints procedure until
default it w
defaultas
default endorsed by the Chief Executive at the final stage and then
default 
defaultbecame 
defaultthe 
defaultLA’s official position 
defaultonce the Ombudsman bec
defaultame involved.  
default&#xa0;
default1.
default8
default What appears particularl
defaulty unfair
default is that the
default Head of Department 
default‘investigating’ my complaint 
defaultwas implicated in the causation of the maladministration complained of and yet
default the LA procedures
default permitted 
defaulthim 
defaultto ‘investigate’ himself and ot
defaulther more junior members 
defaultof his department
default over whom he had managerial responsibility
default.  The Chief Executive then perpetuated 
defaulthis 
defaultnarrative
default to the Ombudsman. 
default&#xa0;
default1.
default9
default In response to 
defaultQ48 
defaultregarding the validating of evidence provided by local authorities, 
defaultDr 
defaultMartin
default: claims to ensure that the evidence used is “fair and properly validated”.  
defaultMr King states “we investigate thoroughly and forensically where that is required”.  
defaultI do not accept either of these statements.  
defaultT
defaulthe Ombudsman 
defaultdoes not consider she
default should
default 
defaultre-open my complaint
default 
defaultdespite it now being known that
default the LA failed to carry out
default its
default own 
defaultinternal investigation 
defaultby someone not involved in the maladministration
default and failed to document any investigation at all
default.  The only thorough and forensic examination of 
defaultthe facts was carried out by a new
default basic grade LA
default officer 
defaultwho could not comprehend the viewpoint taken by the CEO
default (which is still accepted by the Ombudsman)
default and the new officer took advice from 
defaultthe Legal Services Manager
default who disagreed with the CEO
default.  I
defaultt is the 
defaultresponsibility 
defaultof 
defaultthat
default Legal Services Manager 
default(
defaulta qualified solicitor unlike the CEO
default)
default to provide advice to the LA on this matter.  This conflict
default 
defaultis 
defaultundeniable proof of the maladministration
default but the Ombudsman refuses to look into the conflict and as
default recently as 6.12.13. 
defaulttold me 
defaultthat as extensive an investigation as necessary 
defaultwas 
defaultcarried out
default prior to the appointment of the officer who uncovered the true facts with the advice from the Legal Services Manager.  
defaultThis officer
default has told me that no-one has ev
defaulter asked him about the matter in relation to my complaints to the LA.
default  There can be no doubt in my case that the Ombudsman has been misled but then in the face of the undeniable conflict refuses to admit that the investigations were not as thorough as nece
defaultssary. 
default1.10 In Q 49 Dr Martin is asked whether she would “require written transcripts of the interviews from council officers” and she replies by referring 
defaultonly
default 
defaultto the interviews carried out by the Ombudsman.  
defaultI have explained the reasons for my suggestio
defaultn at 1.5 above and I firmly believe they would help everyone.
default1.11
default I omitted 
defaultsuggesting 
defaultthat the transcripts of the interviews carried out by the Ombudsman were appended because I knew that this 
defaultsuggestion 
defaultwould be rejected by the Ombudsman 
defaultciting 
defaultcurrent 
defaultlegislation.
default1.12. I hope that the CLG will be able to pursue my points regarding fairness because it is no-one’s interests for maladministration to be allowed to continue in even one case especially when LA funds are as limited as now.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default17 December 201
default3
default1
default&#xa0;
default