&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence submitted defaultby Professor Roger Scullydefault (DWB 04)default&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefault&#xa0;
defaultWhile t
defaulthe Draft Wales Bil
defaultl 
default(2013) 
defaultcovers many important matters, here
default I will concentrate on the proposed reform to National Assembly for Wales (NAW) elections regarding ‘dual candidacy’. I will address two areas: the substance of the proposed reform, and the process of reform.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDual Candidacy: Substantive Considerationsdefault&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultGovernment of Wales Act 2006 (GOWA) 
defaultmade a change to
default 
defaultthe 
defaultelectoral system 
defaultused for NAW elections
default,
default introducing a provision 
defaultto 
defaultprevent
default individuals from standing 
defaultas candidates
default both in a constituency and for a regional party list.
default Th
defaulte justification offered for this change 
defaultin the Government White Paper preceding the 2006 Act
default was 
defaultthat “
defaultvoters are confused and concerned by the way the Assembly’s 
defaultelectoral system permits 
defaultcandidate
defaults who lose in a first past the post
default 
defaultconstituency ballot still to become Assembly Members representing the
default 
defaultsame area through the regional list system and competing with
default 
defaultAssembly Members who defeated them
default” (
defaultBetter Governance for Wales
default, 2005, 
defaultp.3)
default. The White paper
default later 
defaultalso 
defaultargued that 
default“For losing candidates to become Assembly Members regardless of their constituency election results both devalues the integrity of the electoral system in the eyes of the public and acts as a disincentive to vote in constituency elections” (
defaultBetter Governance for Wales
default, 2005, 
defaultpp.28-29).
default&#xa0;
defaultIn evidence given to th
defaultis
default committee 
defaultduring consideration of the 2006 Act, 
defaultI argued against the ban on dual candidacy. I believe that the main argument
defaults I developed then remain intact
default:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, while 
defaultthe arguments used to support the 2006 ban do not stand up to any serious scrutiny, the ban is
default now in place. The question is whether it should remain.
default&#xa0;
defaultN
defaulteither 
defaultAMS 
defaultwith dual candidacy nor 
defaultAMS 
defaultwithout dual candidacy would be my most preferred system for electing the NAW. 
default(I am personally a supporter of the Single Transferrable Vote, as advocated by the Richard Commission). However, of these two versions of AMS, I think that one with dual candidacy
default is clearly preferable.
default&#xa0;
defaultI find it very difficult to see 
defaultany
default strong principled arguments against dual candidacy
default.
default Opponents of dual candidacy have argued that it is inappropriate for those who have already been rejected by the electorate in a particular constituency to nonetheless end up being elected.
default This, I believe, represents a fundamental misunderstanding of the AMS electoral system – at least in its MMP variant. 
defaultDefeated constituency candidates have, of course, been rejected for that particular constituency. But list seats are a wholly different type
default of mandate, and under MMP these seats are allocated
default 
defaultin a way that 
defaultspecifically allows for the representation of parties who have 
defaultnot
default been very successful 
defaultin constituency contests – parties who have, in a sense, been rejected at the constituency level.
default If parties that are defeated at constituency level can still win representation through the list, then it is difficult to see why that should not also apply to individuals.
default&#xa0;
defaultBanning dual candidacy under the MMM variant of AMS makes a little more sense. 
defaultUnder MMM, t
defaulthe constituency and list elections are wholly separate, with the allocation of list seats unrelated to success in the constituencies. In this context, requiring parties to offer separate groups of candidates for these separate contests perhaps makes some sense. For MMP, it makes no sense whatsoever. This is probably why n
defaulto countries or regions other than Wales who have 
defaultimplemented the 
defaultMMP version of AMS have seen any compelling reasons to
default ban dual candidacy
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThere are also some good practical reasons for favouring dual candidacy. First, banning dual candidacy helps to create 
defaultsome perverse incentives. 
defaultIn particular, banning dual candidacy makes
default it electorally advantageous for a party’s list 
defaultcandidates 
defaultto see their 
defaultconstituency candidates
default lose
default.
default Similarly, voters wishing to see a particular list candidate elected may have an incentive to vote against that candidate’s party in the constituency election.
default&#xa0;
defaultSecond (and I think, 
defaultfar 
defaultmore importantly), there is a compelling need to ensure that the electoral system does not inhibit the quality of elected representation within the NAW. The Assembly has only 60 members – as many have arg
defaultued, a wholly inadequate number. Given the paucity of AMs, we should certainly not impose restrictions on the ability of the parties to ensure that their best people (or at least those whom the parties believe are their best people) are elected to the Assembly. This was a 
defaultprincipal
default conclusion 
defaultof the recent 
defaultdetailed investigation of AMS conducted in New Zealand, where the system was introduced to replace First Past the Post in the 1990s.
default As the final report of this commission stated, “It is both proper and desirable under MMP that political parties can protect good candidates contesting marginal or unwinnable electorates [constituencies] by positioning them high enough on their list to be elected.” (
defaultReport of the Electoral Commission on the Review of the MMP Voting System
default, 2012, 
defaultp.38)
default&#xa0;
defaultThirdly, there are better ways than a ban on dual candidacy to remove the problems that have occasionally been reported 
defaultwith 
defaultconstituency representatives 
defaultbeing 
defaultconcerned that list AMs are encroaching on ‘their turf’. One way would be to implement the Richard Commission recommendation of STV.
default STV would remove the problem of there being two categories of elected representative (constituency and list), and place all AMs on the same footing. 
defaultA second 
defaultway of addressing the problem 
defaultmight 
defaultbe to elect list AMs from a national list (with a 5% minimum threshold imposed to prevent the system fragmenting excessively
default). This
default 
defaultwould remove
default any sense of local r
defaultepresentation from list members, and might well therefore reduce the scope for friction between constituency and list members.
default&#xa0;
defaultBy far the most detailed examination of AMS conducted in recent times 
defaultis 
defaultthat 
defaultproduced in 
defaultNew Zealand
default.
default The
default report
default of this Commission
default, which drew on substantial evidence from numerous sources, is an impressive piece of work. On dual candidacy, the report’s conclusion was unambiguous: 
default“Candidates 
defaultshould continue to be able to stand both for an electorate [constituency] seat and be on a party list” (
defaultReport of the Electoral Commission on the Review of the MMP Voting System
default, 2012, 
defaultp.37).
default&#xa0;
defaultI see no reason to disagree with this conclusion.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultReforming defaultthe NAW Electoral Systemdefault: Improving the Processdefault&#xa0;
defaultDebates about dual candidacy, both in 2006 and now, raise questions o
defaultf process as well as substance. The following statements 
defaultare 
defaultso obvious as to border on the banal, but they have, I think, important implications for when and how electoral systems are
default reformed
default:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultFrom these statements, it follows 
defaultfairly 
defaultdirectly 
defaultthat political p
defaultarties should be inhibited from 
defaultchanging electoral rules 
defaultto their own benefit
default. It also follows
default that any 
defaultchanges to 
defaultthe 
defaultrules 
defaultthat are implemented 
defaultshould command widespread
default, cross-party
default support
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultEvaluated in relation to these standards, the 
default2006 dual candidacy 
defaultban fell a long way short of the ideal.
default 
defaultThe ban 
defaultwas mentioned in the 2005 Labour manifesto, so there was in some sense an electoral mandate for the change.
default 
defaultHowever, as described above, 
defaultthe ban was introduced 
defaulton 
defaultthe 
defaultbasis of very dubious arguments
default,
default and 
defaultunderpinned by 
defaultlittle
default or no
default obvious
defaultly
default principle
defaultd conduct. The ban was also introduced
default by one party against widespread opposition: not only 
defaultthat of 
defaultall
default 
defaultthe 
defaultother major parties, but also 
defaultagainst the 
defaultviews of most other 
defaultrelevant 
defaultnon-partisan actors (
defaultthe 
defaultElectoral Commission, 
defaultthe 
defaultE
defaultlectoral 
defaultR
defaulteform 
defaultS
defaultociety
default, 
defaultand most academic commentators
default)
default.
default This is surely an example
default, in terms of the 
defaultprocess
default of electoral reform,
default that we 
defaultin Wales 
defaultshould 
defaultseek never 
defaultto repeat.
default&#xa0;
defaultOne could also question the 
defaultprocedural 
defaultlegitimacy of Westminster continuing
default, over the
default long-term
default,
default to legislate over electoral arrangements for the NAW, 
defaultgiven that the Assembly is 
defaulta body with its own democratic mandate. Such questions may become particularly stark in the future if one see
defaults UK governments elected with
default very limited electoral support from Wales.
default&#xa0;
defaultI therefore propose that the Wales Bill should be amended to transfer powers over the conduct of NAW elections to the National Assembly. 
defaultHowever, to prevent any possibility of manipulation 
defaultof the electoral rules 
defaultby 
defaultany 
defaultone party, 
defaultthe Bill 
defaultshould 
defaultalso provide 
defaultfor 
defaulta ‘
defaultsuper-majority
default’
default requirement for any change to 
defaultthe 
defaultcurrent la
defaultw, with a 
defaultthree-quarters majority 
defaultof all 
defaultNAW 
defaultmembers 
defaultneeded 
defaultto approve any changes. This would prevent 
defaultany 
defaultsingle party 
defaultfrom changing the electoral system to suit its 
defaultown interests
default; 
defaultindeed, a three-quarters majority 
defaultwould 
defaultalso 
defaulthave prevented 
defaultthe 2007-11 
defaultLabour-Plaid coalition 
defaultfrom 
defaultchanging 
defaultthe electoral system 
defaultwithout 
defaultthe support of 
defaultat least one other party.
default&#xa0;
default6 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default I thank Prof David Farrell (University College Dublin), Dr Thomas Lundberg (University of Glasgow), Prof Louis 
defaultMassic
defaultote
default (Laval University, Quebec) and 
defaultDr Alan Renwick (University of Reading) for assistance 
defaultand advice 
defaultin drafting this evidence.
default See
default evidence by Prof David Farrell of University College Dublin to the Irish Convention on the Constitution, in
default 
defaultFourth Report of the Convention on the Constitution
default, 
defaultAugust 2013 (
defaulthttps://www.constitution.ie/AttachmentDownload.ashx?mid=fdf70670-030f-e311-a203-005056a32ee4
default).
default Bavaria offers an interesting variant of MMP: it uses open-list MMP, where Bavarians vote for individual party list candidates, not closed party lists. It does not allow for the dual listing of candidate names 
defaultin the particular single-member constituency in which a candidate stands
default, because the constituency candidates' names would be on the ballot papers twice. These candidates, however, 
defaultmust
default be dual candidates and are on their parties' ballot paper lists everywhere else in the electoral region.
default It should be pointed out, for the sake of accuracy that Hungary’s system, and Italy’s between 1993-2005, are
default/were
default only semi-proportional.
default The ban on dual candidacy in Ukraine was introduced prior to the 2002 parliamentary elections – by the same party that 
defaultnot long afterwards 
defaultattempted to fix the result of the 
defaultp
defaultresidential election and poison the main opposition candidate.
default In debates preceding the 2006 GOWA, particular attention focused on the example of the 2003 constituency contest in Clwyd West, where three defeated constituency candidates all ended up being elected as list AMs.
default 
default 
defaultReport of the Electoral Commission on the Review of the MMP Voting System
default, 2012; available at:
defaulthttp://www.mmpreview.org.nz/have-your-say/final-report
default.
default One might reasonably question the extent to which voters had been inf
defaultormed about, never mind endorsed, the dual candidacy ban in the 2005 general election.
default 
defaultThe issue was barely discussed in the main Labour manifesto, which stated only that 
default“
defaultIn 
defaultWales we will develop democratic devolution by creating a stronger
default 
defaultAssembly with enhanced legislative powers and a reformed structure
default 
defaultand electoral system to make the exercise of Assembly responsibilities
default 
defaultclearer and more accountable to the public
default” (p.108, 
defaultBritain Forward not Back
default)
default. 
defaultThe dual candidacy b
defaultan 
defaultwas 
defaultonly mentioned explicitly 
defaulto
defaultn pp.108-110 of 
defaultthe 
defaultWelsh Labour ma
defaultnifesto, 
defaultWales Forward not Back
default.
default