&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Freight on Rail (CYS0111)defaultFreight on Rail thanks the Transport Select Committee for the opportunity to comment on its 
defaultfollow up 
defaultinquiry into
default cycling safety
default.  We are commenting on 
default2
default of the subject headings.
defaultFreight 
defaulton Rail, a partnership of the rail freight industry, the transport trade unions and Campaign for Better Transport, works to promote the economic, social and environmental benefits of rail freight to local and central Government.
defaultWhat central and local Gove
defaultrnment could do to improve cycling safety. Ideas could include better training and advice for drivers and cyclists, better enforcement of the law applying to drivers and cyclists, and better vehicle and road infrastructure.
defaultLack of enforcement of road regudefaultlations with regard to HGVs adddefaultsdefault to dangers.defaultImproved enforcement of vehicle standards would 
default 
defaulthelp 
defaultensure that 
defaultall lorries meet legal guidelines 
defaultwhich are designed for safety reasons. The r
defaultoad haulage industry has a poor record in complying with existing r
defaultoad regulations
default which puts other road users, especially cyclists, at added risk.
defaultIn the UK,
default&#xa0;
default83% of HGVs exceeded their speed limit of 50 mph on dual carriageways and over 70% exceeded the 40 mph limit on single carriageway roads. 
defaultSource DfT Vehicle speeds
default 2011
defaultUK road side weight checks had a 58% overloading rate. 
defaultSource FTA Logistics Report 2012
defaultWhether it would be desirable and feasible to segregate cyclists from other road users, including, for example, by prohibiting HGVs from entering city centres at 
defaultpeak hours.
defaultIn analysing cycling fatalities involving HGVs it is 
defaultimportant to look at Government policy about HGV safety holistically. For example it is r
defaultelevant to examine HGV involvement in all road fatalities
default because 
defaultthere are serious inconsistencies in
default Government policy 
defaultwith regard to 
defaultHGV
default safety which could make cycling more dangerous. Therefore the following issues need to be taken into account:-
default&#xa0;
default1. HGV involvement in fatalities is rising as other categories of fatal collisions reduce.
default2. DfT authoris
defaulted ten year trials of 7ft longer HGVs are more dangerous to cyclists
default3. Impact on cyclists of increasing HGV single carriageway speeds to 45 or 50 mph.
default4. Impact on cyclists of Government policy allowing cross border traffic of mega trucks in the revision 
defaultof European Weights and Measures Legislation 
default&#xa0;
default1. General picture of HGV involvement in fatalities is rising defaultLorries are involved in a increasing percentage of fatal traffic accidents on Britain's roads. 
defaultMTRU analysis using DfT statistics 
defaultshow
defaults
default that 
defaultin 
default2013
default HGVs were implicated in more than half of fatal motorway accidents and one-in-five fatal accidents on A-roads
default continuing negative trends over the last five 
defaultyears.
defaultThis new research shows lorries are involved in a high percentage of the most serious a
defaultccidents on our roads and that the problem is getting worse. 
defaultTherefore, we believe t
defaulthe Government should be taking steps to reduce the dangers posed by lorries
default instead of introducing initiatives to al
defaultlow 
default7ft 
defaultlonger lorries and 
defaultconsidering 
defaulthigher speed limi
defaultts for HGVs on single carriageways
default, for example
default.
defaultThe assessment of official statistics, carried out by the Metropolitan Transport Research Unit (MTRU) for Campaign for Better Transport, showed that the ratio of fatal road accidents involving Heavy Good Ve
defaulthicles (HGVs) compared with those involving other vehicle types has been climbing year on year:
defaultYeardefaultHGV involvement in fatalitiesdefault% of defaulttraffic HGVsdefault2007
default41%
default12.2
default2008
default36.7
default12
default2009
default31.1
default12
default2010
default38.1
default11.3
default2011
default40.6
default11.2
default2012default52.3
default10.9
defaultSource DfT traffic statisticsdefault2. defaultTrials of 7ft longer lorries which are more dangerous to cyclists and other vulnerable road users than existing HGVsdefaultAfter pressure from the road haulage industry, t
defaulthe Government allowed trials of longer trailers despite the fact that these vehicles are more dangerous to cyclists 
defaultand other vulnerable road users 
defaultthan existing HGVs
default,
default especially on urban roads
default.
defaultIn fact, the 
defaultGovernment did not even evaluate the impact on cyclists.
defaultThe then Minister, Mike 
defaultPenning
default,
default state
defaultd in Parliament on 15
defaultth
default September 2011 
defaultthat 
defaultthe risk is not there for 
defaultcyclists 
defaultdespite the fact that 
defaulta subsequent PQ showed that 
defaultthe Government 
defaultdid not 
defaultdisaggregate the risk by road user
defaultThe revised Impact Assessment published with the Government's Report on the Consultation into longer semi-trailers does not disaggregate the safety risk between different categories of road user”
default 
default(
defaultwww.theyworkforyou.com/wrans/?id=2011-11-22b.81709.h
defaultThe Government’s own tests showed that the new longer lorries 
default7ft (
default2.05 metres
default)
default longer which are 18.55m long, have a greater tail swing, increased driver blind spots and inferior manoeuvrability which makes them more dangerous to cyclists.
default Many urban junctions would simply not be able to accommodate these longer trucks, forcing them 
defaultto mount kerbs, traffic islands or enter adjacent lanes when turning. 
defaultTherefore, it is imperative that the longer HGVs are restricted to designated local authority routes agreed by the local authority and the operator. 
defaultCBT 
defaultresearch,
default 
defaultshows that because of 
defaulttheir reduced manoeuvrability, particularly while cornering (known as out-swing) these trailers are unsuitable for many of 
defaulturban 
defaultthe roads on which they are being used. 
defaultCBT and the Technical Advisers’ Group has 
defaultwritten to 
defaultthe Secretary of State calling on 
defaulthim to give local authorities the right to dictate which routes these lorries can travel on. 
defaultAs the DfT consultation stated, the new longer lorries, which are up to 18.55 m long, have a greater tail swing [1] and larger driver blind spots than existing 16.50 m trucks. The demonstration of the 18.55 m HGV at Millbrook on June 27th 2013 confirmed th
defaultat the longer HGV has inferior manoeuvrability compared with the existing 16.50 m lorries which makes negotiating tight turns on urban roads even more difficult . A demonstration of the new longer vehicle at the Department for Transport’s testing facility 
defaultin Millbrook Bedfordshire showed the rear tail-swing when turning corners was significantly greater than normal HGVs, up to 1.3  m greater under normal road conditions, and would occur within the driver’s blind spot, posing a significant threat to other ro
defaultad users. 
default During the consultation, DfT officials had confirmed that the 18.55 m longer HGV, while meeting existing standards does not have the turning performance of existing 16.5 m HGVs.  
defaultDfT research stated 7ft longer trailer would have increased tail 
defaultswings and be more susceptible to cross-winds. P8 para 28. DfT Longer Semi-trailers Feasibility Study.  
defaultThe DfT research states that the longer lorry could meet existing standards with either 2 self-steer axles or a command steer axles but meeting existing
default standards is not the same things as meeting existing performance Page 7 paragraph 23 DfT Feasibility Study 2011. 
default3. defaultReviewing HGV speed limits on singledefault&#xa0;defaultcarriageway roadsdefaultGovernment is also showing signs of ceding to industry demands on speed limits for 
defaultlorries. Currently, HGVs are limited to 40mph on single carriageway A-roads. Government recently consulted on plans to raise this to 45 or 50mph and is expected to make an announcement shortly
default. Increasing speed of HGVs will make them more dangerous for cyc
defaultlists.
default4. defaultThreat of mega trucks 82 ft long defaultfrom revision of European directive 96/53defaultIn the current revision of the directive 96/53 governing weights and dimensions of HGVs
default which is currently being considered by the Parliament and Council
default, the European Commission has proposed allowing cross border traffic of mega trucks between consenting countries. The industry is pushing for double articulated mega-trucks to be allowed on UK roads even though the Commission has admitted that these 25 met
defaultre trucks can worsen road safety. 
defaultIn the Netherlands which allows mega trucks in national traffic
default 
defaultits Government
default 
defaultstated that
default they 
defaultshould only be allowed on roads with a separate infrastructure for cyclists
default which does not exist on most UK roads Source 
defaultMarc
defaulth 2010 Monitoring traffic safety Rijkswaterstaat, Ministry of Transport, Public Works and Water Management
defaultAnd Dutch 
defaultGovernment experts acknowledged serious hazards of mega trucks for cyclists.  
defaultSWOV, the Dutch national road safety 
defaultr
defaultesearch Institute has shown that lorries with trailers have an almost equal if not greater risk of accidents occurring on the side of the lorry or trailer and thereby doubling the risk that cyclists face 
default.
defaultWhile it is welcome that the UK Government has st
defaultated that it will not allow 25 metre mega trucks on UK roads, the reality is that it will come under huge pressure from the road haulage industry again to allow these massive HGVs on competition grounds. Therefore
default the only way to stop mega trucks is for th
defaulte 
defaultUK Government to oppose European plans for these huge lorries to be allowed to cross national borders
default, which it is not currently planning to do
default. 
defaultAll the UK cycling organisations are opposed to mega trucks as is the European Cyclists’ Federation which re
defaultpresents their European interests. ECF stated in its briefing – gigaliners/mega trucks and road safety for cyclists January 2012 that 
defaultHowever despite the lack of clear empirical evidence we believe 
defaultthat there would be increased road safety issues concernin
defaultg blind spots; manoeuvrability and handling; infrastructure damage and changes.
default 
default  
defaultFor more information go to 
defaulthttp://www.freightonrail.org.uk/MegaTrucksBriefingMay2013.htm
defaultPhilippa Edmunds January 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default http//www.swov.nl/rapport/R-2008-11A.pdf
default