              
default              
defaultDAR 08
default          defaultNon-attributable note from a development professionaldefault on business caesdefault'defaultBusiness cases are too intricate and require too many different people to be involved in their completion.  The origin of the more complex business case is in the increased emphasis on results introduced by the coalition government.  
defaultWhile the results emphasis is positive
default,
default the w
defaultay it is being processed is not, and is in fact helping prevent the achievement of results.
defaultIt is the combination of the 
defaultunwieldy business case and the requirement for Secretary of State approval for virtually every spending decision that causes the most difficulty. Officials are very nervous about documents that are seen by the Minister. They will seek to ensure that these documents are as near perfection as possible.  Many more officials in the decision-making chain get involved in reviewing the documents.  Drafts are sent back to be redone. 
defaultApp
defaultendices are pour
defaulted over and revised.  Language is tightened.
defaultIn one case, which took over 9 months from completion of original business case to approval, officials were commenting on each other’s comments and holding up review of the next drafts because they were on holiday. 
defaultThis happens all too often. Of course those commenting often don’t understand the details of the proposal 
defaultbecause they are remote from it, thus causing confusion which 
defaultthen 
defaultneeds to be cleared up.
defaultThen in some circumstances the Secretary of State asks a question because she doesn’t understand some aspect, and a whole new flurry of activity starts.
defaultThere is in fact a second round of Secretary of State approvals, relating to contracts.  Every contr
defaultact or contract amendment 
defaultabove £1m has to go to Secretary of State for approval.   So one spending programme may go through three or four or 
defaultmore 
defaultSecretary of State approvals – at business case, at contract approval and at approval of one or more amendments. 
defaultAgain this involves substantial delays, as associated paperwork is prepared and argued over by officials. Procurement staff spend months disputing costs and quarrelling over minutiae. If contract amendments are involved, the delays can be very damaging.  Funding runs out and project teams have to be stood down. 
defaultThis hurts DFID’s reputation as a reliable and credible organisation. Counterparts have been promised assistance and are astounded when it stops.  
defaultTheir own credibility is
default sometimes also undermined. 
defaultMomen
defaulttum is lost. Restarting activities is inevitably more costly.
default&#xa0;
defaultA key aspect of the 
defaultoverall 
defaultproblem are the disincentives provided to DFID staff 
defaultby the heavy 
defaultand time-consuming procedures.  It’s always more difficult to find the dog that didn’t bark, but there will be many valuable initiatives that have not been started because DFID staff either could not summon the enthusiasm or have the time to fill in all the necessary paperwork
default, or realised that the whole process would take so long as to make it futile.
default In many circumstances an intervention needs to be done quickly if it is to be at all effective.
default Intricate project description and approval requirements
default mean that action cannot be taken quick
defaultly, thus it is
default often not attempted at all.
default DFID’s 
defaultreputation for 
defaultspeed and flexibility is being lost.
defaultIt has been said by some DFID staff that there are so many procedures these days that no-one knows what they are. This creates a natural hesitancy to proceed on behalf of some staff.  In some 
defaultcircumstances staff don't go ahead with an activity because they imagine that a procedure prevents it when in fact this is not so. All this leads to climate of conservatism
default and cautiousness, where the
default least risk
defaulty
default course seems the most attractive.
default 
defaultThe solution is to (a) 
defaultgreatly streamline project preparation activities
default and (b) remove the requirement 
defaultfor Secretary of State approval, except in the case of very large or very politically sensitive spending 
defaultprogrammes.
default 
defaultDFID staff should be trusted to take decisions.
default&#xa0;
default