&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the Association of Employment and Learning Providers (AELP)defaultIntroductiondefaultThe Association of Employment and Learning Providers (AELP) represents the interests of a range of organisations delivering vocational learning and employment and employability support.  The majority of our 650+ member organisations are independent provide
defaultrs (from both the private and the third sectors) holding contracts with the Skills Funding Agency, with many also delivering Department for Education (EFA) and Department of Work and Pensions (DWP) funded provision.  In addition to these we have a number o
defaultf colleges in membership, as well as non-delivery organisations such as SSCs and awarding bodies as Associate Members, which means that AELP offers a well rounded and comprehensive perspective and insight on matters relating to its remit. 
defaultCommentsdefault1.
default 
defaultWe 
defaultwelcome
default the significant increase in the proportion of independent providers 
defaultbeing rated good or outstanding in their Ofsted inspect
defaultions over the past 12 months.  T
defaulthe number of independent providers rated good or outstanding in the last academic year rose f
defaultrom 60% to 67
default%.
default2. 
defaultWe were also pleased with 
defaultthe overall number of providers improving their grades (32% of providers inspected) in comparison with last year’s figures
default, however, there were some
default (16%) whose overall rating fell
default.  We recognise that
default any provi
defaultder receiving an inadequate grade is still a cause for concern
default we
default 
defaultare
default committed to working with Ofsted, the Education and Training Foundation and providers to address this challenge.
default3. 
defaultThe observations in the Chief Inspector’s annual report are based on f
defaultindings of the first year of the new Common Inspection Framework (CIF) with the revised Framework’s emphasis on the quality of teaching and learning.  Most providers will now have built the quality processes into their delivery models and we would expect t
defaulthe improvements to continue.  
defaultIndeed, recently
default there have been two
default grade 1 inspections of independent providers.  
default4. 
defaultDelivery of teaching and learning in a work based environment is different to the traditional classroom approaches.  Work based learning b
defaulty definition takes place in the many different environments of the workplace, often involving very small groups or even individual trainees.  The training provider may also be operating over several sites, which requires management oversight of a consisten
defaultt set of standards.
default  
defaultIndependent providers score highly in terms of flexibility of their training and meeting employers’ needs
default, 
defaultfactors key to the effective delivery of training and important elements in the CIF standards.  As employers take a more central
default role in the development of programmes employer responsiveness 
defaultwill be
default an increasingly important factor in the inspection process
default.
default   
default5. 
defaultWe note that the Ofsted Annual Report suggests “that there is still too much provision that is not responsive to local 
defaultemployment needs” and that “training providers need to ensure that vocational provision is better matched to the needs of local businesses and communities”.  We must point out that apprenticeship provision precisely reflects the real time needs of local bu
defaultsinesses as all apprentices are now employed by those same businesses
default and 
defaultapprenticeships are attracting hugely impressive satisfaction rates from both employers (92%
default) and apprentices (89%
default) alike.
default  
default6. 
defaultAELP does
default, however,
default believe that LEPs have a role to play in developing local skills and employability strategies
default.  Their knowledge of their locality should be used to identify needs and opportunities, in conjunction with providers, to inform the development of appropriate 
defaultlocal skills and employability provision across the country.  We are committed to working with the LEPs and local employers to ensure that they play a full part in the delivery of those local skills strategies and we would recommend full engagement and inv
defaultolvement of providers on LEP Boards and Committees.
default7.
default 
defaultThe report goes on to state that apprenticeships are failing to meet their full potential because young people 
defaultare not sufficiently employable, lacking basic skills, aptitudes in vocational and employa
defaultbility skills and appropriate attitudes for work.  This is not the fault of apprenticeships or their provi
defaultders, but the result of failure
default 
defaultof
default the school system to prepare 
defaultall 
defaultyoung people adequately for the world of work. 
default 
defaultHopefully the introduction of stud
defaulty programmes, and Traineeships in particular, will help address these issues and enable more young people to progress into employment and ideally apprenticeships.  It will be important however that Ofsted recognises that progression into an apprenticeship 
defaultis not the only successful outcome for Traineeships, and that any employment, or progression to further training or HE, must also be seen as successful outcomes for the new programme.
default8. 
defaultIt is also true that success rates play a significant part in determi
defaultning the grade of the provider.  Delivering to some hard-to-help groups in difficult working environments can mean it is very challenging to deliver high success rates and this partly explains why classroom based learning has traditionally had higher succe
defaultss rates.  
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultWe agree with the comments on the need for good careers guidance
default.  
defaultAll young people should have impartial and independent careers advice about all their options, including the costs of various routes open to them, the funding available, the
default range of occupations that can be accessed as well as the labour market demand and likely wage returns for these occupations.
default  
defaultUnder the current arrangements access to independent careers advice is inadequate and many providers believe that the signposting to vocational training 
defaultneeds to be addressed as a matter of urgency
default, a view seemingly shared by Chief Inspector, Sir Michael W
defaultilshaw, following Ofsted’s review of careers guidance in schools
default 
defaultin 2013.
default  We also agree the finding that there is no easy system for transferring information on young people directly from schools to other providers.  Both issues – good careers guidance a
defaultnd the need for a simple system to transfer information – need to be addressed as a priority.
default10.
default 
defaultWe note that English and maths provision remains a significant concern.  The report does, however recognise that many FE and skills providers are working with
default learners who failed to achieve level 2 in these vital skills at school.  It also recognises that young people achieved better results in functional English and maths than those taking GCSEs as a repeat.  This supports our long held position, that function
defaultal skills must not be replaced by GCSEs in those subjects until the qualifications have been reformed 
defaultto ensure the content, assessment strategy and flexibility of the examination structure is appropriate for the workplace.
default&#xa0;defaultConclusiondefaultThe achievement of h
defaultigh standards of delivery which are reflected in Ofsted grades has never been more important.  With the requirement for providers to have grades 1 or 2 to deliver traineeships, the need to achieve good grades has become more important and AELP and its memb
defaulters recognise this.  
default&#xa0;
defaultWe are confident that independent training providers can respond to this challenge and deliver excellent results.   We will work with Ofsted to ensure that the inspection framework recognises excellent delivery and creates the platfo
defaultrm for provider improvement.  This will enable us to work in partnership with providers to generate better grades across the sector
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultAELP would welcome the opportunity to discuss these comments in more detail with members of the Committee as it prepares 
defaultfor the evidence session in February.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default Source: FE Week special supplement dated September 2013 on Ofsted inspections
default 2012-13
default Data taken from
default NAS website.
default BIS research paper No 76, May 2012.  The proportion satisfied rose to 92% amongst completers.
default The AELP responses to the APPG Local Growth skills inquiry and the APPG consultation, 
defaultRising to the challenge: how LEPs can deliver local growth
default strategies set out our position on localism and LEPs in more detail.
default 
defaultGoing in the right direction? Careers guidance in schools from September 2012
default.  Report by Ofsted published in September 2013.
default