&#xa0;
defaultSubmission from Wakefield Council on behalf of the Key Cities Group (FDC15)defaultInquiry into fiscal devolution to Cities and Local Enterprise PartnershipsdefaultSubmission by 
defaultPeter Box CBE, Leader, Wakefield Council and 
defaultJoanne Roney OBE, Chief Executive 
defaultWakefield Council
default,
default on behalf of the Key Cities Group.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultExecutive Summarydefault1. Government’s current approach to devolution is confusing and lacks coordination and levels of commitment across departments. This is not only in terms of scope but also in terms of funding streams and powers. 
default2
default. Devolution 
defaultto cities is strongly welcomed
default and the prop
defaultosals put to government by the Core Cities G
defaultroup are supported. H
defaultowever to maximise its economic 
defaultimpact
default and potential to improve public services and reduce costs
default 
defaultdevolution
default should go beyond 
defaultboth 
defaultcore cities
default and 
defaultLo
defaultcal Enterprise Partnerships. 
defaultThis would not only 
defaultwiden and 
defaultstrengthen impact, but also prevent the risk
default of increasing economic inequality within regions.
default3. Medium sized cities are ideally placed to deliver devolution. Tried and tested governance and accountability structures are in place and 
defaultbecause of their relative scale and agility Key C
defaultities could speedily deliver significant outcomes and savings for b
defaultoth government and the communities they serve as well as 
defaultpiloting and demonstrating benefits for wider adoption.
default 
default4. Devolution has a number of advantages to central government beyond improving outcomes and stimulating economic growth. These include reduci
defaultng bureaucracy and associated costs and encouraging partnership and innovation at a local level. Devolution also reduces risks to central government by encouraging local partnerships to bear more financial and other risks for delivery of key programmes or 
defaultproject
defaults
default.
default5. Devolution should not only be fiscal, it should also come with 
defaultlegislative 
defaultfreedoms 
defaultand flexibilities to allow partners
default 
defaultand 
defaultcommunities to 
defaulttake full advantage in terms of fiscal freedoms, e.g. in terms 
defaultof investment, business support and stimu
defaultlating housing growth.
default6. If Government wish to take full advantage of devolution then devolved powers and freedoms need to be coherent across departments, universal and not time limited.
default7
default. 
defaultGovernment should develop a menu of devolved fiscal and other powers, including borrowing freedoms, 
defaultto each tier and typology of local authorities – including county and district councils.
defaultDevolution – history and issues  default8. Since the 1990’s the history o
defaultf devolution to local government in England has been one of ‘earned autonomy’  - freedoms and flexibilities granted to individual councils, often on a time limited basis linked to the achievement of targets, identified through negotiation with central gove
defaultrnment departments. Local Public Service Agreements, Local Area Agreements and Total Place pilots under the previous government all followed this pattern, and this approach is currently being replicated in individually negotiated City Deals and Community B
defaultudget pilots – although there is a welcome recognition from the present government of the value of  multi area (e.g. city region/LEP or county wide) agreements. Governments have also made additional powers for 
defaultlocal areas 
defaultdependent on moving to new governa
defaultnce arrangements e.g. changing the committee system for the Leader and Cabinet model under the previous government, the additional powers for areas with directly elected mayors granted under the 2011 Localism Act and additional freedoms and funding for are
defaultas establishing Combined Authorities. 
default9. The December 2013 National Audit Office ‘Funding and Structures for local economic growth’ report (p35) also noted: 
default“Local bodies have had to coordinate a range of individual initiatives with different objectives, 
defaultfunding arrangements, timetables and reporting requirements. Local Interviewees have told us that departments have different approaches to localism and how far they devolve responsibility differs. This makes it difficult for local bodies to be clear about 
defaultthe policy framework within which they operate
default”. 
default10. If Government wish to take full advantage of devolution then dev
defaultolved powers and freedoms need to
default be coherent across departments, universal and not time limited, allowing local leaders and business to m
defaultake and deliver effective long term plans and actions for securing economic growth and sustainability. 
default11. We note and welcome that the December 2013 
defaultautumn
default statement (p85) stated that Government will be: “
defaultworking with departments to give local public ser
defaultvices the same long-term indicative budgets as departments from the next Spending Review
default”. Giving local authorities the power to set balanced budgets over the period of these longer term indicative budgets would not only support long term planning for infr
defaultastructure and economic growth but also stimulate further medium term ‘invest to save’ activity by local services.
default&#xa0;defaultDevolution: default Fdefaultiscal and defaultSdefaulttatutorydefault12. The Key Cities Group welcomes the 
defaultCommittee's decision to explore options for further fiscal devolution at sub national level. 
defaultWe strongly
default 
defaultconcur with the statement of Greg Clark MP that "
default… overcentralisation has been such a disaster for urban Britain. Over-mighty and over-extended, the 
defaultGovernment has, for decades, robbed our cities of their trump card; their ability to do things differently.”
default13. Strong fiscal powers, including powers to borrow (through bonds and other means), raise and vary local taxes have been at the heart of the succ
defaultess of European and US cities of all sizes. 
defaultA
default recent example is Baltimore, which in December 
default2013 is finalising a bond 
defaultof 
default$
default35m to secure the commencement of the $1.8bn Harbor Point development - transforming the waterfront of that city.
default 
default14
default. There are also clear benefits for the economy and communities through local design and control of programmes. The London Councils ‘Getting London Working’ report found that national models of employment support are delivering around a 4% success rate, wh
defaultilst those designed locally are achieving over 25% success. 
default15
default. 
defaultLocalisation of programmes 
defaultat city and county level 
defaultsuch as the Work Programme and SFA funding would not only reduce costs to central government but encourage innovation 
defaultat a local level as c
defaultan be seen by examples such as the Chester/West Cheshire/DWP 
defaultCommunity Budget pilot 
default‘Altogether Better’ programme to tackle worklessness. It is noted and welcomed that BIS intend to transfer greater control of SFA 
defaultskills capital budgets
default 
defaultt
defaulto Local Enterprise
default Partnerships, but this proces
defaults should be taken forward and devolved
default to local area level
default – allowing greater focus on issues identified at the front line
default.
default16. Devolution would also reduce risk to central government. Local government and their associated 
defaultlocal partnerships have a strong track record of accountability (including through the democratic and electoral process), audit and delivering both innovation and efficiency within tight financial limits. Encouraging local areas through devolution of respo
defaultnsibilities as well as funding streams would lead to local authorities and partnerships bear
defaulting a higher proportion of risk.
default 
defaultBecause of their manageable scale and straightforward governance, m
defaultedium sized cities would also be able to deliver change in key a
defaultreas (e.g. through better targeted skills funding through working with local employers and training providers) at 
defaulta fas
defaultter rate than core cities. In addition, if new policies and programmes are trialled in medium sized cities, it minimises risk for nationa
defaultl government and evaluations of the programmes can be shared with other larger and smaller.
default17. The Key Cities Group would argue that Whitehall should operate on the presumption that all programmes should be devolved and delivered through  existing local a
defaultreas and local governance arrangements, unless a strong business case can be made – including in terms of cost, risk and efficiency - for the contrary (e.g. national and regional infrastructure projects).
default18. The Core Cities Group in their November 2013 
default‘Growth Prospectus’ have developed a number of proposals for fiscal devolution. These include:
default 
default              
defaultcompleted irrespective of where that house is built.
default&#xa0;
default19
default. Delivering the above and other devolution measures may require significant and large scale within core cities. Medium sized cities,
default which have existing statutory powers and governance arrangements (unlike LEP’s) are likely to be able to deliver, demonstrate and evaluate the benefits of devolution. We would welcome working with the Treasury and other government departments to identify 
defaultprojects (e.g. local rate variation, localisation of welfare and skills programmes) that would 
defaultspeedily test out new approaches and 
defaultdeliver significant savings and outcomes for government and taxpayers and significantly stimulate economic growth and job cr
defaulteation. 
default20
default. The Key Cities Group supports the freedoms and f
defaultlexibilities identified by the c
defaultore cities. However, we note and welcome that the Committee in its proposed lines of inquiry query '
defaultthe impact on areas not included in any new devolution arrangements.' 
default We would strongly argue that a selective approach to devolution would not deliver optimum opportunities for economic growth and could even lead to increased inequality within regions
default and reduced outcomes overall
default. 
default21
default. 
defaultAn example of this is that in 2012 Westminster City Council collected £1.4bn in Business Rates, of which 90% was returned to Government for wider distribution. If fiscal and other devolution is confined to cities such as
default London, 
defaultthen there is a risk of 
defaulta greater proportion of this and similar funding streams being retained without the opportunity for other cities or areas to expand and grow their economies. The Key Cities Group supports both London and the core cities in 
defaultincreasing powers and fiscal control but believe that, in an already recognisably unbalanced UK economy, there are
default strong risks for
default more deprived areas 
defaultin a selective approach to financial devolution.
default22. The need to balance fiscal localisation with a 
defaultnational approach to tackle inequality and deprivation is noted. However Key Cities would strongly argue that the areas such as landfill tax, and stamp duty and other taxes that have a ‘place basis’ be considered for localisation of finance at city level. 
defaultThis would have the beneficial effect of broadening the tax base and moving local government more swiftly to a self-financing basis.
default23. Fiscal devol
defaultution that does not go beyond core cities
default runs a clear risk of increasing inequality between local areas 
defaultand in reducing overall economic growth nationally as it becomes clustered in areas potentially likely to 'overheat', especially in terms of property and housing affordability. 
default2
default4
default. London is 
defaultan
default 
defaultexemplar
default of this overheating in recent years, as well as the risks of concentrating freedoms and flexibilities in selected cities to the detriment of not just other regions, but to areas on their borders. Southend on Sea is approximately 45 miles from 
defaultLondon;
default howe
defaultver the 2010 National Index of Multiple Deprivation classifies 
default29.9% of its Lower Super Output Areas (around 55,000 residents) as falling within the 30% most deprived areas in the country. 
defaultFiscal devolution and increased powers to Southend would act as a s
defaultignifi
defaultcant economic boost to that area and its residents.
default 
default2
default5
default. 
defaultDevolution should not only apply to cities that are unitary or metropolitan authorities. There is a strong case that those cities which are large second tier authorities within County Councils,
default e.g. Preston, Norwich, Worcester 
defaultetc.
default, should also have a distinct menu of new devolved powers available. This would not only promote localism and stimulate economic growth and innovation, but
default,
default also 
defaultby working with smaller neighbouring districts, 
defaultmitigate risks of increased inequality between areas and encourage cooperation both across local boundaries and between different tiers and types of local authority area. 
defaultDevolving powers 
defaultat
default 
defaulta
default more appropriate level of economic and housing activity rather 
defaultthan within outmoded administrative boundaries would set innovation free at 
defaultthis
default local level
default.  
defaultDevolution needs to be genuinely backed with the powers and flexibilities that will unlock growth locally with clear guidelines – going directly to cities rather
default than through LEP’s where appropriate.
default Resolving issues in some areas (e.g. Southampton) around membership/voting on joint statutory committees would also be welcomed to support delivery of current and future Growth Deals.
defaultGoing beyond core cities default2
default6
default.
default 
defaultEnglish 
defaultmid-sized
default cities have a population of 
default8.9 million, including some of the fastest growing cities in the country, and the business stock of these cities is larger than England’s Core Cities. In 2011, the combined G
defaultross Value Added of England’s twenty
default six
default mid-sized cities amounted to 14% of England’s total and between 2001 and 2011 their total populations grew by more than half a million people. A
default&#xa0;
defaultrecent report by Centre for Cities
default&#xa0;
defaultshows that mid-sized English cities have 11% of their jobs in manufactu
defaultring, compared to 9% in the Core Cities and 3% in London. Mid-sized cities also have a greater proportion of retail employment (11%) than either the Core Cities (10%) or London (9%).
default27
default. 
defaultThe 
defaultCentre for Cities also identified
default that the GVA of mid-sized citie
defaults was worth £162 billion in 2011, slightly less than the £173 billion in the Core Cities. However, the business stock in mid-sized cities – 275,480 firms, or 13.5 per cent of all those based in England - was slightly larger than that of the Core Cities, wh
defaultich were home to 261,775 firms, or 12.8 per cent of the England total.
default2
default8
default. 
defaultThe economy of the United Kingdom is increasingly networked and interconnected. The Work Foundation 
defaultin their 
default‘R
defaultecession, Recovery and Medium Sized Cities’ report 
defaultnoted that 
defaultm
defaultedium-sized cities often have compelling quality of life offerings and also afford opportunities for firms and individuals to take advantage of some of
default the benefits of agglomeration and co-location
default without the high costs
default associated with larger cities
default. 
default&#xa0;
default29
default. 
defaultThe Work Foundation also argues that city performance is affected by the performance of neighbouring cities and that 
defaultUK 
defaultcities are increasingly specialising by function rather than sector. Selective devolution would not only hold back those cities, but a
defaultlso reduce opportunities for cities
default with devolved powers to benefi
defaultt from economic growth 
defaultin their neighbours. 
default&#xa0;
defaultA strategic approach to devolutiondefault30
default. As noted above, much of the history of decentralisation and devolution in England has been uncoordinated, selective and short term. 
default31
default. The Key Cities Group would propose that government act in a corporate and strategic manner by developing a cross gove
defaultrnment menu of 
defaultsignificant 
defaultfunding streams and powers
default that local areas could adopt should they meet local needs or provide local opportunities without the need for long and complex negotiations
default. 
defaultThe long term aim of such a project would be to enable cities
default to be self-financing and able to respond quickly, positively and effectively to long term challenges.
default32
default. For cities these would include the freedoms identified by the Core Cities Group with complimentary powers and devolved funding streams being availabl
defaulte to county and 
defaultlarger 
defaultdistrict councils. 
defaultThis would also support the 
defaultprevious recommendation of the C
defaultommittee for a more formalised 
defaultand balanced 
defaultrelationship between central and local government
default. We believe that this would not only significantly strengthe
defaultn economic growth but also create and empower strong civic leadership whilst reducing costs 
defaultof public services to taxpayers and enabling cities to drive economic growth and improved quality of life for all their residents and the wider nation.
default9 January 2014
default1
default&#xa0;
default