&#xa0;
defaultSubmission from the defaultGreater Birmingham Chambers of Commercedefault (GBCC)default evidence to the enquiry on fdefaultiscal devolution to Cdefaultities and defaultCdefaultity defaultRdefaultegionsdefault (FDC16)defaultWe welcome the opportunity to respond to your enquiry 
defaulton fiscal devolution to cities and city regions. The GBCC supports the principle of greater localisation of economic development to Cities. We are proponents of the wider devolution agenda as expressed in Lord Heseltine’s ‘No Stone Unturned in Pursuit of G
defaultrowth’ report. Nonetheless, we are concerned to ensure that greater fiscal devolution would support economic growth. As such, we echo the observations of the British Chambers of Commerce and recommend that the proposals of the City Centred Campaign are con
defaultsidered
default by government
default as part of a
default root-and-branch review of local taxation and revenue raising options
default within the current parliament
default. 
defaultThe 
defaultGBCC
default is one of the UK’s oldest and largest Chambers. It has nearly 3,000 member companies that employ over 200,000 plus affiliate organisations representing 15,000 people. It offers extensive services to industry and commerce, having served the interests of bu
defaultsiness for three centuries, promoting trade locally, 
defaultnationally and internationally. 
defaultMembers of Greater Birmingham Chambers of Commerce: Birmingham Chamber of Commerce, Burton &amp; District Chamber, Chase Chamber, Lichfield &amp; Tamworth Chamber, Solihull Chambe
defaultr, The Institute of Asian Businesses, Future Faces and the British American Business Council.
default&#xa0;
defaultChambers of Commerce are 
defaultat 
defaultthe forefront of the localism movement. 
defaultThe
default GBCC
default founded the
default Greater Birmingham and Solihull LEP
default with Birmingham City Council. We act
defaultively supported the GBSLEP City Deal, reform of local government finance and a host of other initiatives that give more power to local communities. We think there is scope to greatly increase the use of local government finance vehicles like tax increment 
defaultfinancing and the community infrastructure levy to take forward local infrastructure investment, where this is economically viable, and we welcome a continued debate on how we can deepen the progress already made, and of course how we can strengthen the ro
defaultle of the Chambers in this.
default 
defaultMoreover, we believe there is a huge ca
defaultse to be made for freeing up C
defaultities to define their own priorities and plan at the local level how funding from central government is 
defaultdirected
default.
default There is also a role for Cities in linking up local and national services- and there should be a greater duty placed upon quangos and national departme
defaultn
defaultts to reflect a “bottom up” approach.
default There is significant evidence to indicate that this would
default have a 
defaultmanifold impact on our C
defaultities’ job and wealth creation. 
defaultWe echo Lord 
defaultHeseltine’s observation that even where taxes are appropriately collected and directed from the centre, that the “initiative and delivery
default [of policies and programmes] should rest with loc
defaultal leaders”
default. 
defaultHowever, 
defaultthere are risks around wholesale d
defaultevolution of financial freedoms
default particularly exacerbated by the current retrenchment in local government. It must be a 
defaultcritical
default priority of the nation that we do nothing to 
defaultundermine the e
defaultconomic co
defaultmpetitiveness of our C
defaultities
default- and, of course, with new freedoms comes new opportunities for additional taxes and levies
default aimed at business
default which could stymie the growth of the private sector
default. 
defaultThere are numerous examples of well-intentioned local authority-le
defaultd initiatives like the Living Wage increasing business operation costs – as well as a growing likelihood of the implementation of business taxes like workplace parking levy being utilised more extensively across England and Wales. The cumulative burden of 
defaultsuch 
defaultinitiatives
default could be crippling for inward investment and business growth
default, wealth creation and jobs
default. 
defaultAs such, we support
default a root-and-branch review of local taxation, ideally before the end of the current parliament. 
defaultFor example, w
defaulthilst we do not support the devolution of business 
defaultrate-setting
default to local authorities, the system needs to be more responsive to the loca
defaultl impacts of the business cycle including
default through reform of the valuations system that underpins business rates. 
defaultThis re
defaultview should consider in full the proposals of the City Centred campaign,
default but
default with a
default clear
default 
defaultpriority of
default supporting economic growth and ensuring 
defaultour cities
default are attractive centres for inward investment and business start-ups. 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default  The Rt Hon the Lord Heseltine of Thenford CH
default, ‘No Stone Unturned in Pursuit of Growth’, p. 36
default