&#xa0;
defaultSubmission by Leeds City Council (FDC25)defaultIntroduction
defaultLeeds City Council welcomes the Select Committee’s inquiry into fiscal devolution 
defaultin England, and is pleased to offer this submission for consideration. In our evidence we demonstrate why and how fiscal devolution to cities is essential for the unlocking of local and national growth, thus incr
defaulteasing national competitiveness. 
defaultUnderpinnin
defaultg
default the 
defaultdetails of this submission
default is a clear message
default:
default that cities are 
defaultbest placed
default to take on additional fiscal powers
default,
default and 
defaultwe are ready and willing 
defaultto
default work with Government to deliver the best possible outcomes for devolution
default.  T
defaulthe following proposals 
defaultare ou
defaulttlined 
defaultfor the Committee to consider:
defaultThe opportunities
default offered by fiscal devolution
defaultWhile the Coalition Government has demonstrated a welcome appetite for devol
defaultution
default, 
defaultin too many instances the real powers cities need to drive economic growth have been held back. In order to achieve the growth potential offered by Core Cities such as Leeds, there needs to be a substantial and meaningful shift in current tax distri
defaultbution arrangements, which currently see local authorities only controlling 5% of the taxes raise
defaultd in their areas
default. 
defaultBy meaningful we mean more than simply a distribution of earmarked funds to local authorities. In comparison to cities in Germany, Canada, S
defaultweden, the USA and even Scotland and Wales, English cities continue to be well behind in terms of having the fiscal powers necessary to drive growth. This has a direct and damaging impact on the economic potential and performance of the country as a whole.
defaultBy devolving fiscal powers to Combined Authorities
default,
default 
defaultand giving them 
defaultprecepting powers
default,
default the Government can unlock the growth potential of England’s major cities, driving national economic competitiveness higher, while increasing democratic accountability a
defaultnd oversight of important fiscal functions.
defaultLeeds City Council is the local authority for 
default751,500
default individuals, making it the second largest metropolitan area outside of London. It sits at the heart of a successful City Region 
defaultwith
default an economy worth £
default53bn.  
defaultThe Council
default work
defaults
default closely with 
defaultthe Leeds City Region
default Local Enterprise 
defaultP
defaultartnership, private
default,
default and third sector organisations to promote
default economic
default growth
default that is sustainable, inclusive and shared by all of our citizens.
defaultThe ongoing financial climate is placing
default unprecedented pressures on local government to deliver high quality public services while making substantial reductions in expenditure. 
defaultDespite the impact of the recession
default and the pressure on services,
default Leeds has continued to invest in projects
default and 
defaulthas 
defaultwor
defaultk
defaulted
default closely with the private sector
default to attract businesses and visitors to the city. In 2013 the completion of the Trinity Shopping Centre and the Leeds Arena 
defaultdelivered
default a significant 
defaultuplift for the local economy, and the Council’s leadership role in these p
defaultrojects has been welcomed by organisations such as the CBI.
defaultLeeds recognises the need for local gover
defaultnment to become smaller in size
default while growing in influence, and the importance of working more collaboratively with partners in the private and third secto
defaultrs to create sustainable and inclusive economic growth and opportunities for all. 
defaultBut at the same time, the Government must
default recognise that cities have a much greater role to play in driving economic growth
default and contributing to increased national competitive
defaultness, and that it is a role 
defaultthat cities can only play 
defaultgiven greater fiscal powers and freedoms.
defaultThe Core Cities urban areas
default have the potential to
default put 1.16 million more jobs and £222 billion into the economy
default,
default which is equivalent to the entire economy of Den
defaultmark. It’s equal to almost £14,000 for every person living in a Core City urban area – £52,500 for an average family.
default However to do this 
defaultthere needs to be a
default change 
defaultto 
defaultour approach towards cities, giving them the power and finances to invest in projects cri
defaulttical to their residents and businesses. Currently local authorities control only 5% of the taxes they raise and 60% of spending in a city is controlled centrally. The OECD average
default 
defaultfor the level of taxes controlled at the local level is
default 
defaultover 
defaultfive
default times gre
defaultater 
defaultthan our UK cities
default enjoy
default.
defaultThis system
default and this philosophy
default has failed to produce cities that perform above the national average
default, with only London consistently doing so. 
defaultAs a member of the Core Cities Group
default,
default Leeds is committed to 
defaulta
default 
defaultjoint 
defaultproposal to 
defaultout
defaultperform the national economy and to become financially self-sustaining by 2030.
default To achieve this aim we cannot continue along the current centralised course.
defaultOur proposals
defaultWith the
defaultse
default above potential 
defaultopportunities and outcomes
default in mind, Leeds City Council would make the following 
defaultproposals
default to the Committee:
defaultOn the concept
default of devolution, particularly o
defaultn the devolved area and its government
defaultOver the three years of the Coalition 
defaultg
defaultovernment there have been large scale changes regarding devolved areas beneath the national level. With the dissolving of 
defaultregional development agencies, 
defaultthe 
defaultcreation
default of Local Enterprise Partnerships and
default 
defaultCombined Authorities
default,
default there has been a fundamental sh
defaultift
default in governance
default 
defaultand leadership at the sub-regional level
default.
default The effects of these changes are still being played out, and w
defaultith this in mind
default,
default while
default it is possible to 
defaultconsider
default 
defaultpotential governance
default arrangements 
defaultfor further devolution, we would stress the need 
defaultfor any model of further devolution to be given t
defaulthe time to become effective. 
defaultIn our view, 
defaultCombined Authorities, with precepting powers
default as w
defaultell as devolved mandates, are the most appropriate model
default for fiscal devolution. With 
defaultdemocratic representation from
default all parts of an area of governance, 
defaultthey 
defaultoffer
default the 
defaultessential
default democratic legitimacy
default and local knowledge
default to control
default fiscal powers for local needs. 
defaultFiscal devolution increases local choice and would encourage greater interest in local democracy, instilling m
defaulteaningful accountability for how taxes raised in a place are spent in that place. 
defaultAdditionally, i
defaultt would be for each combined authority to establish a productive and collaborative relationship with their Local Enterprise Partnerships, whose role would incl
defaultude articulating the case for investment at the local level and taking responsibility for some aspects of local funding, particularly around infrastructure and business growth.
defaultA second 
defaultgovernance solution which could be 
defaultconsidered
default would be to change the relationship between 
defaultDepartmental Permanent S
defaultecretaries and lead Chief Executives for a Combined Authority area. 
defaultDelegating
default Accounting Officer responsibilities to a devolved level would allow Whitehall to retain oversight of devolve
defaultd funding
default,
default but 
defaultempower
default Combined Authorities to
default exercise their judgment on how best to
default 
defaultallocate
default 
defaultsupport to
default local priorities.
default These A
defaultccounting Officers c
defaultould be provided with place based settlements for revenue funds, which could include Health and Social Ca
defaultre Integration and Skills and Labour Market Agreements. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHow public services, including employment, skills and welfare, should be organised to complement devolution
defaultThe current arrangements for public services are dominated by individual 
defaultGovernment
default depart
defaultments offering blanket solutions to 
defaultcomplex
default problems. 
defaultIn our view there is much to gain from taking a more holistic and place based approach, allowing issues
default such as health and social care and
default welfare and unemployment to be dealt with in a more joined up w
defaultay in local communities. 
defaultD
defaultevolved revenue could
default and should 
defaultbe channelled into meeting local needs that may not be 
defaultbest addressed through
default national programmes.
defaultAs 
defaultan example
default of this 
defaultmore locally designed approach 
defaultwe support the Core Cities model of a single 
defaultframework for skills and employment systems, organised through a 5-year ‘Skills and 
defaultLabour Market Agreement’ with each Core City. This would help the supply of skills within a local labour market to better reflect the demands of that market and its employe
defaultrs
default, 
defaultand reduce the current 
default17% of job vacancies
default that
default remain unfilled due to skills-gaps
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOn the evidence supporting devolution and what new powers could mean
defaultThe
defaultre is a strong and increasingly conclusive
default evidence 
defaultbase, nationally and internationally, dem
defaultonstrating that
default 
defaultfiscal 
defaultdevolution
default to cities
default lead
defaults
default to 
defaultimproved economic growth
default at the local and national level
default. Professor 
defaultMichael Parkinson’s research into second tier cities has shown that 
defaultcountries that have 
defaultspatial deconcentration of investment and decen
defaulttralised powers and resources
default, like Germany, 
defaultproduce
default 
defaultcities 
defaultthat
default 
defaultout
defaultperform the national average. 
defaultIn the UK only London consistently outperforms the average
default, and
default 
defaultevidence demonstrates that
default this gap between cities and the capital limit
defaults
default national economic performance
default.
defaultHere in the UK, City Deals have shown just some of the possible ways in which devolution can support growth through investment in infrastructure and local services. The Earnback mechanism in Manchester has shown how new fisc
defaultal powers can help to build pots for investment in infrastructure projects, for example. And Leeds City Council, through taking control of the Youth Programme and working with local authority partners in Bradford and Wakefield, has been able to support 2,5
default00 young people into education, employment or training; far outperforming the figures for 
defaultnational
default programmes. 
defaultThese examples demonstrate the potential that cities can offer when they are given new powers and control of finances
default as well as greater influenc
defaulte over the design of interventions
default.
default  
defaultThis potential
default is not only of benefit to the c
defaultities concerned but also to the country as 
defaulta 
defaultwhole, having a positive net effect on the national public balance sheet by reducing the demand on welfare and other services
default 
defaultwh
defaultile
default increasing contributions of income tax, National Insurance and corporation tax. 
default           
defaultThe case for the potential economic impact of the further devolution of powers is, in our view, 
defaultunarguable. The key decision to be made is how devolution can be
default implemented while retaining sufficient oversight and accountability for the reassurance of Government.
default&#xa0;
defaultOn the details
default of devolution, including w
defaulthat taxes may be devolved and proposals for new taxes
defaultWith current arrangements seeing cities retaining 
defaultonly 
default5
default% of 
defaultthe 
defaulttaxes they raise, there is a wealth of potential for devolution of taxes. This is desirable because it will allow areas with different problems and priorities to address their local needs 
defaultwith greater flexibility and efficiency than a nationally c
defaultonsistent and centrally mandated approach can offer
default. It also means that there will be a more reward driven culture for 
defaultcities, where their efforts to reduce 
defaultunemployment or to 
defaultencourage
default business expansion will result in greater retention of incoming taxes 
defaultwhich can be used to meet service needs
default and capture
default future dividends from infrastructure investment
default.
default The following taxes are proposed for devolution 
defaultin their entirety or to contain a financial element to be retained locally.
defaultCouncil Tax
defaultWe call for the imm
defaultediate removal of Council Tax referendum limits. Local authorities know the needs of their areas and should be free 
defaultto 
defaultdetermine their own Council Tax levels having regard to their existing democratic mandates. T
defaulthe 
defaultnew 
defaultcontrol
defaults 
defaultover levies 
defaultthat are limiting the capacity of Combined Authorities to raise funding for infrastructure developments should also be removed and in the longer term successful Combined Authorities should be given precepting powers.
defaultCouncil Tax itself is in need of urgent
default reform. The 
defaultcurrent property bandings are more than twenty years out of date and a
defaultrrangements need to be put in place 
defaultnow 
defaultfor 
defaultgeneral
default revaluation
default. The structure and number of C
defaultouncil 
defaultT
defaultax bands should be reviewed at the same time.
default 
defaultOur ambition is that Coun
defaultcil Tax be developed as a fully localised tax and that the setting and adjustment of bandings should be done by Combined Authorities. We acknowledge that there will be complications in the first instance in this regard, but we would be willing to work with
default Government to make this change. The offer in return for th
defaultis devolution is that retained Council T
defaultax will be used to drive growth and increase prosperity and wellbeing in local areas, better 
defaultmeeting
default the needs of local citizens
default and setting bands that more 
defaultaccurately reflect local 
defaulteconomic conditions
default.
defaultBusiness Rates
defaultLeeds has
default welcomed the retention of 
default50% of 
defaultbusiness rates
default beyond an agreed baseline
default, but 
defaultbelieves
default that 
defaultlocal authorities should be able to retain
default 100%
default of rates collected
default. This would further incen
defaulttivise authorities to support businesses in their
default 
defaultarea and would 
defaultrecompense
default authorities 
defaultfor the substantial investment they make in encouraging business growth
default and business start-ups. Under the current arrangements there was little by way of 
defaulta 
defaulttax incentiv
defaulte for Leeds to 
defaultpush for 
defaultthe acclaimed Trinity Shopping Centre, 
defaultwhich opened
default in 2013. 
defaultIf authorities were to keep 100% of business rates this would
default incentivise
default other areas to invest and support in such projects and enterprises.
defaultIt would also be 
defaultappropriate 
defaultfor
default cities to set their own business rates, as 
defaultwas the case
default prior to 1990. Even within city regions there are diverse and complex economies which would be better managed by combined or local authorities controlling the business rates. This would eliminate 
defaultthe problems arising in relation to a nationally set multiplier and encourage cities to come up with 
defaultinnovative
default approaches to attract and support businesses.
defaultAn additional option could be to impose a retail levy on business units, similar to that introduce
defaultd in
default Northern Ireland on large retail stores. 
defaultThe Northern Ireland Assembly passed 
defaulta new 8.5% local rate on retail outle
defaultts with a rateable value
default above £500,000
default, with the money being reinvested to help local SMEs and other growth targets. This same approach
default could be used in our Core Cities, drawing the benefits from investments into new shopping centres such as the Trinity Centre development in Leeds, and using them to help reinvigorate our local high streets and support local SMEs. 
defaultEmployment Tax
defaultCities are being asked to work hard to support jobs and skills in order to boost the economy and reduce benefit bills. And yet despite this, and the costs incurred by local authorities in attempting to improve this situation, authorities are offered no par
defaultt of the benefits that come from their success in making improvements. A small percentage of devolved finance from either National Insurance or Income Tax would provide local authorities with greater expendable finance to improve employment conditions and 
defaultmeet the needs of their communities that result from greater numbers of jobs i.e. in terms of infrastructure.   
default&#xa0;
defaultOn c
defaulthanges to borrowing and new funding
defaultIn terms of borrowing there is not a great deal that 
defaultwe
default would desire that is not available already. 
defaultThe bigger issue remains that cities lack the revenue streams to repay borrowing, something that fiscal devolution can help to address. 
defaultOne adjustment which would be welcomed would be to change the interest rates for P
defaultublic 
defaultW
defaultorks 
defaultL
defaultoan 
defaultB
defaultoard loans
default, allowing
default authorities to borrow more to fund infrastructure projects. If borrowing rates for Combined Authorities were equalised with those available to LEPs then there would be less demand placed on those LEPs for them to borrow on their behalf, freeing LEPs to co
defaultncentrate on other priorities.
defaultThere is less of a need for new funding,
default with 
defaultyields on 
defaultbonds
default low and crowd sourcing carrying risks as yet unevaluated
default,
default and more of a need to reorganise current arrangements. Capital funds would be much better organised into 
defaulta single pot for each authority, utilising a new acc
defaultounting officer function at the Combined Authority level
default (see above)
default to ensure accountability. The current system of funds, which includes 36 streams for housing alone, is cumbersome and 
defaultinefficient.
defaultTher
defaulte could also be more done to relieve the need for borrowing by relaxing the rules around commercial returns on fees and charges. For example the current arrangements 
defaultto ringfence
default car parking charges
default, thereby limiting the capacity of authorities to reinvest
default this revenue to tackle other problems,
default inhibit
defaults
default local councils from removing pressures to essential services. If 
defaultthere is a genuine partnership between Whitehall and local authorities over funding then both parties will benefit and so will the general pub
defaultlic. 
defaultIn addition there is further work to be done
default 
defaultregarding the 
defaultHousing Revenue Account
default borrowing cap
default,
default despite the adjustments made in the Autumn Statement. If authorities are able to
default demonstrate affordability and reliability of revenue
default they should not be
default limited by an arbitrary figure and need to apply through LEPs for additional borrowing. There is a desperate need to build new affordable homes across the country, not just in the South East, and lifting the cap on HRA borrowing would give 
defaultus a much
default great
defaulter ability to meet that need.  Leeds has committed to build 70,000 new homes 
defaultby 2028, 
defaultand would welcome the 
defaultgranting
default of greater borrowing capabilities to match the city’s ambition.
defaultOne concern is 
defaultthe redistributive effect
default of recent government finance settl
defaultements
default which some authorities 
defaultperceive
default to be unfair
default,
default particularly as the system no longer directly reflects need
default. This could be addressed by ministers retaining powers to set the 
defaultquantum
default of funding, but appointing an independent commission to distribute that funding between local authorities. 
default&#xa0;
defaultConcluding comments
defaultAs we have already noted, the case for the potential economic impact of the further devolution of powers is, in our view, unar
defaultguable. The key decision to be made is how devolution can be implemented while retaining sufficient oversight and accountability for the reassurance of Government, and we reiterate our welcome for the Select Committee’s interest in understanding how this c
defaultan be developed.
defaultAs the main drivers of the nation’s economy
default and home to a significant percentage of the population, 
defaultcities like Leeds
default have
default the
default potential to far exceed their current performance in terms of growth, employment and wellbeing. 
defaultU
defaultnder 
defaultthe curren
defaultt centralised system we
default are stifled from innovation and from addressing local needs 
defaulteffectively. Setting England’s core c
defaultities free 
defaultthrough fiscal devolution 
defaultwill build upon the successes already made under 
defaultCity D
defaulteals and on individual projects
default, and addres
defaults the imbalance that currently exists between benefits and costs for local authorities. 
defaultLeeds City Council 
defaultwould be pleased to offer
default further evidence or assistanc
defaulte as necessary to the Committee. 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default