&#xa0;
defaultSubmission fromdefault Staffordshire County Council FDC27defaultIt is clear that there is a dramatic shift in the perception of the role which Cities fulfil
default within the national economy. 
defaultHistorically
default regarded as focal points for redistributive fiscal policy, city areas are now widely regarded as 
defaulttired 
defaultengines of growth. 
defaultThe sheer volume of research, promotion and the realignment of government policy underline this shift. 
defaultStaffordshire Cou
defaultnty Council believes that 
defaultall 
defaultCities have 
defaultmuch
default potential to contribute to regional economies on a scale that match
defaultes
default our own contribution
default.
default 
defaultHowever there is a risk that shifts in policy could undermine wider partners and potentially inhibit localism through
default the creation of a two 
defaultspeed
default local government structure. We 
defaultacknowledge that city areas are currently the toast of policy makers and government ministers, but we would caution against 
defaultsolely 
defaultcity 
defaultisland 
defaultfocus
default that undermines the impact of 
defaultperi
default-urban 
defaultareas 
defaultaround
default cities
default such as Staffordshire, located between 3 such city areas,
default – relegating them to some sort of ‘hinterland’ status. 
defaultCity areas are an important element in rebalancing the economy, but the advantages and offer is based in part on the impact and 
defaultsupport received from 
defaultperi
default-urban
default areas. 
defaultPeri
default-urban 
defaultCounty areas support city development through 
defaultperi
default-urban
default housing, skills,
default acc
defaultessibility and transportation; this contribution must be acknowledged in policy making in a way that recognises that in the case
default of devolution, 
defaultperi
default-urban
default areas are 
defaultenabled
default equally to the empowerment of cities. 
defaultIf not the risk is one of competitive advantage that could undermine economic and spatial development in 
defaultperi
default-urban
default areas
default, 
defaultparticularly
default in the ability to attract investment
default which in turn 
default will in
defaulthibit growth within city areas as the wider region would effectively 
defaultcomplement
default the economic growth that cities deliver. 
defaultAdditionally, a
defaults some cities are developing from a potentially low base, and having to address the need to shift
default their focus from provision of services to economic development, there is also an element of how long it will be before cities act as real drivers of growth, beyond the 
defaultcontribution
default made by Birmingham, Manchester and London.
defaultFundamentally – the task of emp
defaultowering cities is an opportunity to empower local government
default generally
default, building on the work started by Lord Heseltine and taking the development of Local Enterprise Partnerships to its logical conclusion. 
defaultStaffordshire County Council 
defaultisn’t
default resistant to ch
defaultange or a focus on devolving powers to cities, but rather it should be seen to support 
defaultperi
default-urban 
defaultcounty 
defaultareas at
default the same time
default.
defaultIn summary
default, Staffordshire County Council would like to welcome 
defaultthe developing cities policy
default as crucial to growth
default but raise the 
defaultpoint that cities
default 
defaultare 
defaultnot islands surrounded by economic backwardness and that in general policy devolution and support should be seen as opportunity to empower all local areas
default at the same time to maximise opportunity
default. 
defaultStaffordshire 
defaultCounty Council believes that 
defaultthere is an argument that instead of a 
defaultsole 
defaultfocus on cit
defaulty islands
default, a greater overall level of devolution be considered in respect of 
defaultthe 
defaultsummary benefits assumed for city areas. 
defaultHowever, the problem with ascribing a ‘devolved’
default area is that it can imply that the city is key 
defaulta
defaultuthority – effectively in charge of areas nearby. This undermines localism, local determination and simply passes the top-down approach endured from central government to cities, who by virtue of their eleva
defaultted status in public debates would be 
defaultinward looking and 
defaultless inclined to the cross-border working, partnerships and co-operation that could ensure the benefits of further devolution could affect a wider population. 
defaultThere is also a need to review the logi
defaultc that focuses policy onto city areas – it seems to assume that economic development within city areas is 
defaultboth guaranteed and sustainable. Whilst Cities are clearly areas that make a substantial contribution to economic growth, the determining factors in t
defaulthat growth is largely absent from the debate. 
defaultMoreover, the contribution made through 
defaultperi
default-urban
default areas is also largely absent. 
defaultFor example, the areas considered part of a city area – in addition to their relative affluence, economic activity may not actua
defaultlly fall within what we determine a city. Defining boundaries are a key element which to a certain extent should have been 
defaultreflected by LEPs aligning with functional economic areas
default, the reality is you cannot serve two master
defaults
default but can work as equals. An exa
defaultmple is the joint working between two LEPs and 3 local authorities over i54 and JLR compared with housing numbers and regional spatial planning
default. 
default This would enable a greater focus on travel to work areas, local skills training and the wider supply chain.
default N
defaulteither health services, education nor the business economy respect local government boundaries as lines on a map.
defaultHowever, any degree of devolution opens up a wider debate on the 
defaultneed for a possible re-organisation of local government, which in itself nece
defaultssitates a review of a proper devolution of powers. Yet the reticence of government and the popular format of cities policy 
defaultsuggest
default that this won’t take place – creating a problem that cities areas will get a competitive advantage relative to other areas a
defaultnd undermine localism and local accountability. 
defaultThis is especially true with regard to housing – whilst it would be hoped that city areas would focus on regeneration within their defined areas, a wider concern is that the need for city growth would involv
defaulte development within areas adjoining the city. This would in sum place the 
defaultburden;
default cost and impact on other areas yet leave the benefit within a city confine. 
defaultThe notion of complementing devolution is perhaps too far in respect of wider public services – unless wholesale reorganisation
default within local government
default is being undertaken, the provision of public goods 
defaultwould still need to develop along the lines of partnership and integration which is already being undertaken. 
defaultIn particular the 
defaultcommissioning
default of local public services with greater control and adaptation
default,
default 
defaultc
defaultould present difficulties in adjoining areas in te
defaultrms of the differences in services and approach. We believe in maximum local discretion but again the development of pockets of devolution that isn’t reflected across the wider local government and public sector would create a level of complexity and poten
defaulttial 
defaultduplication that would have far reaching consequences. 
default Additionally it would also undermined a coordinated approach to dealing with areas of deprivation in County areas, especially as currently constructed funding formulas generally lack any impact o
defaultn rural areas
default, meaning those County areas with scarce funds have to find innovative ways to deliver services
default. 
defaultHowever we also believe that there is 
defaultsignificant
default learning that can be undertaken from the City Deals the government has implemented. These offer
default a general model on how individual areas can establish areas of agreement regarding key economic drivers with government. 
defaultWithin the defined boundaries of a city the city council, through its current partnerships and links 
defaultwo
defaultuld be the basis of governance and accountability. 
defaultIn terms of cross-border partnerships, the key element would be to undertake the development of rural-urban partnerships (the OECD has conducted a lot of work on this through the Rural Policy Reviews). 
defaultThese partnerships ensure a balance between the competing development needs of both areas, whilst ensuring that each facilitates the others developments. 
defaultWe would however be opposed to a situation where an area ‘defined’ either by city areas, LEPs or the 
defaultgovernment would be used to create zones of influence. Again in the context of the difficulties in establishing areas such approaches will have a massive impact on accountability effect
defaultively sidelining local councils; furthermore, there is a risk that in s
defaultuch cases, City areas would simply look to acquire influence over areas or zones for development leaving local areas poorer and once again footing the bill for an approach that is skewed toward city areas. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would naturally question any set of data or 
defaultreports that focuses purely on cities, and would suggest that the evidence can appear quite compelling. However a critical review would raises the query that in some contexts the ‘
defaultimprovement’ needs to be seen in light of the contribution made by periphera
defaultl areas.
default&#xa0;
defaultAs we have already highlighted, 
defaultthere is a risk that devolution focused on Cities will simply create a two 
defaultspeed
default local government. Such devolution would not address flaws within the funding formula that would enable county councils to address rural deprivation, and in all 
defaultlikelihood
default woul
defaultd lead to a situation where cities would become even more a focus of government policy, leaving surrounding areas as zones of influence to mini-city states 
defaultand anything beyond as a hinterland. 
defaultIf wider devolution with local government as a whole could not
default be achieved, then at least the devolutionary arrangements would need to compel city areas to work with wider peripheral areas on a partnership basis. Our preference would be to see a development of our work so far in building stronger partnership foundati
defaultons, such as those built with Stoke-on-Trent City Council to support the development of the LEP and the City Deal offer to the government. 
defaultWe believe it remains in the County Council’s best interests to work with 
defaultall 
defaultCities
default both within and around us
default, just
default as it is to work directly with the government as well as our peers in other areas. However a comprehensive policy targeted at cities would make that approach more difficult if for no other reason it would effectively change the relationship to one where o
defaultne was seen as more important relative to the other. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAgain, any adjustment made to the fiscal devolution to local government would necessitate a review of the constitutional arrangements. But the rebalance of powers and responsibilities would need to b
defaulte based on an agreement between national and local government. This is logical and doesn’t account for the potential political dimensions that would come in to play, nor does it account for the somewhat legendary opposition that comes from some civil serva
defaultnts. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAny attempt at reform on the existing system would need to account for this long term possibility – clearly this would require a long term assessment of where local government is currently and where it is heading in terms of adapting to the realitie
defaults of public services in a period which will defined by a renegotiation of the social contract between individuals and the state. 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default