&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultEssex County Council default(LTD0040)default&#xa0;
defaultEssex County Council welcomes the Select Committee’s invitation to submit evidence on local decision making for transport schemes and would wish 
defaultto make 
defaultthe foll
defaultowing submission
default:
defaultTdefaulthe Rationaldefaulte
default 
defaultThe County Council sees the m
defaultove from a complex array of challenge funding, local block allocations and major scheme funding routes
default, as a positive move 
defaultsignaling
default a new emphasis on local decision making rather than direct control by Central Government. Th
defaulte newly implemented arrangement
defaults for LTB
default funding and LEP SEP funding have already resulted in
default a better basis for local investment priorities to be determined and advanced collectively with partners. 
defaultThe advantagesdefault of undertaking this work in the way being rolled 
defaultout
default include potentially
default greater transparency of decision-making
default amongst stakeholders
default, more involvement of partners 
defaultand stakeholders 
defaultin ensuring outcomes are achieved, less bureaucracy in carrying out multiple funding bids
default,
default and a pipeline of work
default rather than the pursuit of one-
defaultof
defaultf opportunities for funding through challenge bids or major project applications.  
defaultPossible disadvadefaultntagesdefault include, less democratic accountability, devising compliant assurance frameworks, the involvement of multiple partners in the local decision making process, the gradual erosion of Local Transport Plans and a possible erosion of autonomy that the Local Tra
defaultnsport Authorities currently enjoy which carries with it statutory Highway Authority responsibilities.
defaultThe Count
defaulty Council does not see that 
defaultlocal bodies as being 
defaultset up as 
defaultseparate delivery entities
default; rather they are a
default collection of decision makers engaged upon a collective exercise in prioritizing work
default,
default which is then implemented through existing mechanisms. If viewed in this way the capacity already in the system can be harnessed to add value to the process.
default On occasio
defaultn there may be the need for consultancy assistance but this would be targeted at specific tasks rather than being used on an ongoing basis
default 
defaultWithin the SELTB
default and SELEP the collective resources
default of the organisations
default involved
default has been harnessed to produce an a
defaultssurance framework to satisfy Government and National Audit requirements
default,
default as well as an internal prioritisation process where benefits both transport and economic can be drawn together from the collective wisdom, perspective and knowledge of the parent org
defaultanisations.
defaultAn optimum bodydefault is difficult to specify. 
default 
defaultAn
defaulty
default body set up needs to reflect the circumstances, geography, statutory powers, resourcing and partnerships which can be harnessed by those who form the driving force to plan and deliver transport impr
defaultovements. LTBs and LEPS vary across the country. Some conform to existing local authority boundaries, whilst others cover multiple authority areas. Furthermore prior to LTBs being devised government had the idea that perhaps consortia would become establis
defaulthed, recognising perhaps that a consortium would cross boundaries in the pursuit of a single project or strategy
default,
default and presumably could be formed and then dissolved once the task or project had been achieved. The concept of Integrated Transport Authorities 
defaultis open to Councils under statute 
defaultand whereas the existing Passenger T
defaultransport Authorities have embraced this concept others areas 
default(
defaultnotic
defaulte
defaultably in the south of the co
defaultuntry)
default have yet to take this approach.
defaultTraditionally these proposals often come through the auspices of HA or NR since their projects naturally effect more than one authority. Occasionally and increasingly local autho
defaultrities take the lead such as the
default examples
default of the
default A14 promoted and 
defaultcoordinated
default by
default Cambridgeshire County Council or the A47 by Norfolk County Council. What seems certain is that considerable engagement needs to take place outside 
defaultof 
defaultperhaps the traditional c
defaultonsultation or even planning mechanisms which may present too much of a 
defaultformal “atmosphere” for useful dialogue to take place. 
defaultIn Essex use has been made of the Transport Boar
defaultds which exist in Thames Gateway, Haven Gateway
default the London-Stansted Gateway
default area
default. Here multiple authority-
default organisations, businesses and other agencies have the opportunity to 
defaultbe 
defaultpart of a strategic approach which then spawns major projects. The collective input helps to raise awareness for the promoting authority and the project itse
defaultlf gains wider support through this approach.
default The Boards are engagement mechanisms rather than delivery bodies and projects are implemented through partner organisation supply chains with their own internal governance used to ensure both project and democr
defaultatic accountability
defaultIn the LEP arena, current experience has shown a similar effect to the Transport Boards. 
defaultOnce the first generation of SEPs has been produced there will be a need 
defaultfor 
defaultcross-LEP discussions on the larger projects. Such discussion for a ha
defaultve yet to emerge to consider specific projects although they are in evidence to take on board the influences of ideas and programmes being advanced by neighbouring LEPs.
defaultIt has been Essex’s experience
default that cross-authority, cross-
defaultLEP and joint working with HA and NR has resulted in good working arrangements which foster a collaborative approach. The experience of the Transport Boards has demo
defaultnstrated 
defaultthat 
defaultthis
default collaboration
default,
default with
default HA in particular
default,
default and with DfT
default generally
default has been extremely helpful. Improvements how
defaulte
defaultver need to be made and the areas below are possible candidates for this:
defaultThe current funding being m
defaultade available for major projects is greater than that made available in previous comprehensive spending reviews. Although it was disappointing to see the initial allocation reduced with the onset of the 
defaultLTB/
defaultSEP, there are signs that 
defaultall-in-all 
defaultLocal Transp
defaultort Authorities will see on average more than the one major scheme per five year average that was 
defaultinherent in 
defaultthe previous system. In part this is a function of the extra funding being made available and in part this is because six years of funding has bee
defaultn outlined leading to greater confidence that it is worth the investment in upfront design and planning work prior to impleme
defaultn
defaulttation.
defaultWithin this generally favorable landscape however there are some areas which cause local transport authorities genuine 
defaultconcern:
defaultThe impacts foreseen are largely p
defaultositive and comprise: 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default