&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultLife Cycle UK
default (CYS0112)
defaultL
defaultife Cycle UK believes that cycling is a safe activity in Britain’s towns and cities.  However, we recognise that many people do not feel safe, particularly when they don’t have the skills to cycle in traffic.  
defaultLife Cycle does not believe that the answer t
defaulto improving safety lies in segregating cyclists from cars, although we recognise that on some routes this is appropriate. 
defaultLife Cycle 15- year experience of delivering cycle training shows that  the provision of high quality  training to people of all ages,
default can ensure they have the appropriate skil
defaultls to negotiate traffic safely, understand how to choose routes that have less traffic giving them the confidence to be safe on the roads. 
default&#xa0;
defaultBikeability
default should be available to 
defaultchild
defaultren 
defaultfro
defaultm year 5 onwards, and also available to all secondary school age children.  We believe that 
defaultchildren and young people are ready to start cycling at different stages in their development and 
defaulttraining should be 
defaultavailable to support them at the point when the
defaulty are ready, not only in Primary School. 
default 
defaultLife Cycle trained 650 adults to the National Standard in 2013 to cycle safely on the 
defaultroads
default of Bristol enabling them to feel safe and confident to cycle.  However, cycle training is not widely
default available and is dependent on the priorities of local government. We believe the provision of low-cost high quality adult cycle training should be universally available to adults, wherever they live in England.  
default&#xa0;
defaultEmployers should be incentivised to encou
defaultrage staff who cycle to take up opportunities for training. 
default&#xa0;
defaultAs part of the 
defaultstandard driving test, and the HGV licence test, 
defaultwe believe that all drivers should be given cyclist aw
defaulta
defaultreness training. This needs to increase their und
defaulterstanding of how and why cyclists behave the way the
defaulty
default do on the 
defaultroa
defaultd, and 
defaulthow 
defaultdriver’s
default 
defaultshould behave correspondingly.  
defaultE.g
default the reasons why a cyclist takes a position in the centre of the lane. 
default              
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default