&#xa0;
defaultSubmission from the British Property Federation (FDC32)default&#xa0;
defaultThis evidence by the British Property Federation has been 
defaultprepared as a contribution to the Communit
defaulties
default and Local Government Select Committee inquiry into 
defaultwhether and how fiscal and financial powers could be devolved to cities
default and city regions
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe British Property Federation (BPF) is the voice of property in the UK, representing companies owning, managing and investing in property. This includes a broad range of businesses – commercial property owners, the financial institutions and pension fund
defaults, corporate landlords, local private landlords – as well as all those professions that support the industry. 
default&#xa0;defaultIntroductiondefaultThe BPF strongly supports the principle of
default devolving
default greater powers and responsibilities to cities
default / city regions
default.
default We believe that 
defaultthe
default 
defaultpoor comparative performance of many English cities is due at least in part to 
defaultthe over centralised nature of Government in the UK.
default 
defaultInitiatives
default such as City Deals represent a 
defaultstep
default in the right direction but much more needs to be done to give 
defaultour major 
defaultcities
default the
default degree of
default initiative and the
default level of
default resources 
defaultthat will
default enable them to fulfil their potential as  drivers of growth. The predominant feeling
default within the property sector
default is that many in central Government are 
defaultstill 
defaultreluctant to let go and give 
defaultc
defaultities
default their head. This is in stark contrast to the greater autonomy, particularly fiscal autonomy, enjoyed by many competitor cities elsewhere in Europe.  
defaultWe believe that those running cities, working in partnership with business and other interest groups,
default are best place to understand local needs
default – for instance on matters such as 
defaultinfrastructure
default and
default skills 
default- a
defaultnd have the drive and 
defaultcommitment
default to carry through appropriate programmes   to address them 
defaultThe underperformance of English citiesdefaultA  series
default  of research reports over the last decade  ha
defaults
default highlighted the underperformance of English cities in comparison with their international  peers including those in Europe.  In his 2004 report, ‘Competitive European Cities: Where do the Core Cities Stand?’,
default  Professor Michael   Parkinson  said that ‘It is clear that, despite their relative renaissance in recent years, the Core Cities still lag behind their European counterparts in terms of competitiveness.’  Although he was at pains to stress that there are 
defaultimportant variations within the UK Core Cities and 
defaultthat many 
defaulthad improved their performance his overall message was stark: UK cities do not punch their economic weight in a European context. They lag significantly behind many of their European continental 
defaultcounterparts
default in areas such as  innovation, workforce qualifications, connectivity, employment rates, social composition and attractiveness to the private sector
default. This is made worse by the fact that European cities do not punch their weight globally.
defaultAnothe
defaultr report in 2006, The Competitive Economic Performance of English Cities, by Oxford Brookes University and others also highlighted the uncompetitiveness of English cites.
defaultThe latest UK Competitiveness Index for 2013 also point
defaults
default to
default a
default growing divergence betw
defaulteen the best and least well perfoming areas in the UK
default,
default the best area
defaults
default being almost exclusively in London and the South 
defaultE
defaultast.
defaultWhilst 
defaultmany of the core cities have made real 
defaultprogress 
defaultsince 2004
default the long economic recession 
defaultthat the country has suffered for muc
defaulth of the last decade
default mean
defaults that many of the 
default  fundamental problems  of competitiveness
default highlighted by 
defaultP
defaultrofessor Parkinson ad others
default remain
default to be tackled
default.
defaultWould greater devolution of fiscal powers help?defaultTackling uncompetitiveness is
default, 
defaultof course
default, a highly 
defaultcom
defaultplex issue
default and there is no simple answer
default. However,  one 
defaultcontributory factor
default that 
defaulthas been
default consistently
default been 
default raised 
defaultby those who have looked at this issue
default 
defaultis the over centralisation of decision making and fisca
defaultl
default control in the UK 
default 
defaultin contrast 
defaultto the greater autonomy enjoyed by many 
default more successful c
defaultit
defaulties in Europe and elsewhere
default. 
defaultT
defaulthis it is often suggested
default 
defaultdetracts from the ability of 
defaultcities / city regions
default to   
defaultframe policies and set priorities 
defaultbest 
default suited to the needs of their areas. 
defaultT
defaulthe trend in continental Europe has been to decentralise and regionalise
default 
defaultdecision-making, placing powers at the lowest level.
default As a result, c
defaultontinental cities have responsibility
default 
defaultfor a wider range of functions which affect their economic competitiveness than
default do their
default 
defaultUK counterparts.
default 
defaultProfessor Parkinson summed up the position as follows
default:
defaultContinental cities typically have more diverse forms of local revenue and more buoyant tax bases, which make them less fiscally dependent upon the national state and more pro
defaultactive in their development strategies. Many European cities have powerful elected mayors who give clear leadership to economic development. Many successful cities have been deeply involved in European systems and networks, which has encouraged them to be
defaultinternationalist, expansionist and entrepreneurial. The mix varies but it is difficult to
defaultdisagree with the view that their combination of powers and resources make continental
defaultcities more proactive, more entrepreneurial and probably more competitive. The 
defaultmost
defaultsuccessful cities in Europe remain German. They have substantial powers and resources and operate in the most decentralised national system. UK cities arguably have fewer powers, resources and responsibilities than their competitors and have been less
default engaged in the European project. And they have been less successful economically. The more centralised governmental, institutional, and financial system must be one dimension of the
defaultunderperformance
default of UK cities. The policy implication is not a short term one. But it is
defaultclear. Letting go achieves more.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Oxford Brookes report 
defaultalso 
defaultconcluded
default that more autonomy would be helpful:
defaultUrban economic governance is weak and relatively ineffective in England
default. In
default 
defaultorder for the cities themselves to respond more effectively to the framework
default 
defaultconditions set by national government they need be given more power and
default 
defaultfreedom to introduce new institutional structures tailored to the speciﬁc
default 
defaulteconomic needs of their loca
defaultl economies. This could include the freedom to
default 
defaultreform local government institutions in order to make them more dynamic and
default 
defaultincrease their capacity for long-term strategic decision making.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe
default most recent 
defaultreport 
defaultto address this issue, albeit in a London co
defaultntext, was
default ‘Raising the Capital’
default,
default issued in 
defaultM
defaultay 2013
default by
default 
defaultthe London Finance Commission.
default 
defaultAlthough 
defaultthe Commission
default felt that academic evidence about t
defaulth
defaulte impact of devolving fiscal pow
defaulter
defaults on economic growth was inconclusive
default it highlighted
default (using work 
defaultcommissioned fro
defaultm
default the University of Toronto
default)
default  the very low levels of fiscal autonomy enjoyed b
defaulty
default UK cities
default compared with those in other countries
default. The report
default concluded that London would benefit from having more revenue streams under its control
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe view odefaultf the BPFdefaultThe predominant view within the property industry is that strong local leadership and initiative 
defaultare
default essential to taking forward
default a long-term vision for a city / city region. However
default the
default ambition and enthusiasm of civic leaders and other
default local lea
defaultders
default is being stymied by 
defaulta continuing
default reluctance
default within
default central Government to relinquish control. 
defaultT
defaulthere is a
default 
defaultstrong desire
default within the sector 
defaultto move away from what has
default apt
defaultl
defaulty
default 
defaultbeen 
defaultdubbed the ‘infantilisation’ of local government.  
default 
defaultOver the last year the B
defaultPF has held a number of high level roundtables in major cities around the country including Manchester, Liverpool and Birmingham which have brought 
defaulttogether 
defaultleading local 
defaultfigures in
default the property industry 
defaultand
default leaders of local government.  The aim was to explore barriers to economic growth and development and ways of overcoming them.
defaultThere was a remarkable degree of cross-sector support for
default the principle of
default devolving greater powers to 
defaultcities / city regions.
default 
default 
defaultA
defaultmong the k
defaultey messages were
default:
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAs already mentioned,
default the case for
default greater 
defaultdevolution w
defaultas
default 
defaultrecently 
defaultexplored 
defaultby
default the London Finance Commission
default in  its report
default, ‘Raising th
defaulte Capital’ .
default 
defaultAlthough the report was London specific many of the arguments put forward are just as relevant to other cities.  Indeed it could be argued that
default the
default 
defaultneed for greater autonomy is even greater in other cities as 
defaultLondon is such a major global forc
defaulte that it has the capacity to thrive even in the absence of greater autonomy.  
default&#xa0;
defaultPicking up some of the themes discussed in that report 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default9 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default