&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by
default Dr. Einat Wilf
defaultDr. Einat Wilf,
default is an expert on international relations and has focused her research in recent years on the role of UNRWA in perpetuating the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Dr. Wilf is currently a Senior Fellow with the Jewish People Policy Institute and a former 
defaultLabour/I
defaultndependence 
defaultmember of the Israeli Parliament, serving on its influential Foreign Affairs and Defen
defaultc
defaulte Committee.
default Dr. Wilf is
default 
defaulta graduate of Harvard (BA), INSEAD (MBA) and Cambridge University (PhD).
defaultThe following expert opinion makes the case for reform of 
defaultthe United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) as means for clearing the path to peace based on the principle of two states for two peoples. This opinion argues that
default&#xa0;
defaultthe handling of the Palestinian refugee problem – in particular, the inflation of its 
defaultscale – by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) is a rarely acknowledged obstacle to peace.
defaultThe ideas put forth here for reform of UNRWA are as follows:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDefining the Problem
default(1) One of the greatest obstacles to peace, and certainly the least acknowledged, is the perpetuation of the Palestinian refugee problem and the inflation of its scale by the United Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA). W
defaulthereas the actual number of Arabs who could still claim to be refugees as a result of the Arab-Israeli war of 1947-1949 is today no more than several tens of thousands, the number of those registered as refugees is reaching 5 million, with millions more cl
defaultaiming to have that status.
default (2) Since the Second World War the UN High Commissioner for Refugees has been responsible for the welfare of all refugees in the world and has assisted in their resettlement and relocation – so that nearly all of them are no lo
defaultnger refugees – with one exception: the Arabs from Palestine. By contrast, UNRWA, the organisation created specifically to handle the Arab refugees from Palestine from the 1947-1949 Arab-Israel war, has collaborated with the Arab refusal to resettle the re
defaultfugees in the areas where they reside, or to relocate them to third countries. Worse, UNRWA has ensured that the refugee issue only grows larger by automatically registering descendants of the original refugees from the war as refugees themselves in perpet
defaultuity.
default This practice is entirely not necessitated by UNRWA’s original UN General Assembly mandate. The decision to automatically grant refugee status in perpetuity, while also avoiding any resettlement efforts – without parallel in any other conflict, is en
defaulttirely UNRWA’s own. 
default(3) For several decades UNRWA has been engaging in an act of bureaucratic self-aggrandisement, inflating the numbers of those in its care, ensuring the growth of its budget. If the descendants of the Arab refugees from the Arab-Israeli war were treated lik
defaulte all other refugees, including the Jewish ones, they would not quality for refugee status because almost all of them (upward of 80 per cent) are either citizens of a third country, such as Jordan, or they live in the places where they were born and expect
default to have a future such as Gaza and the West Bank. The Palestinians born in the West Bank and Gaza are not fleeing war and are not seeking refuge. They are considered citizens of Palestine by the Palestinian Authority itself, just like all other Palestinian
defaults born in these territories. No other people in the world are registered as refugees while being citizens of another country or territory. Moreover, if the European Union has adopted the policy that Gaza and the West Bank are territories to be allocated to
default Palestine – and some EU countries already recognise Palestine as a state – then 
defaultit makes no sense for it to argue that people who were born and are living in Palestine are refugees from… Palestine.default(4) The remaining 20 per cent of the descendants who are 
defaultnot Jordanian citizens or citizens of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza and the West Bank, are inhabitants of Syria and Lebanon who are by law denied the right to citizenship granted to all other Syrians and Lebanese. Yet, UNRWA does nothing to fight for t
defaulthe right of these Lebanese and Syrian-born Arabs to citizenship, collaborating in their discrimination and the perpetuation of their refugee status.
default(5) Why does this matter for peace? Because if millions of Arabs who are citizens of 
defaultJordan and the Palesti
defaultnian Authority, or inhabitants of Syria and Lebanon, claim to be refugees from what is today Israel, even though they were never born there and never lived there, and demand that as a result of this refugee status they be given the right to relocate to Isr
defaultael (‘the right of return’), 
defaultthen the whole basis for peace by means of two states for two people crumbles
default. If Israel with its 6 million Jews and more than 1.5 million Arabs has to absorb between 5 and 8 million 
defaultArab 
defaultPalestinians then the Jews will be rele
defaultgated again to living as a minority among those who do not view them as equals; the only country in which the Jews can exercise their right to self-determination would be no more.
default This idea cannot be considered a serious basis for peace among equals.
defaultThe R
defaultole of 
defaultthe UK as a 
defaultDonor Countr
defaulty
default(6) 
defaultEven though some of UNRWA’s practices obstruct the path to peace based on the principle of two states for two peoples, it 
defaultis 
defaultheavily 
defaultfunded by countries 
defaultthat
default support 
defaultpeace based on this principle
default. The United States, the EU, the UK, Canada, Japan and Australia fund 99 per cent of UNRWA’s annual budget of 
defaultapproximately
default $1 billion, whereas the 56 Islamic countries supply only a few million dollars.
default The donor countries are the ones who truly determine
default whether UNRWA’s practices are supported or not. UNRWA’s mandate by the UN General Assembly leaves substantial 
defaultmanoeuvring
default room 
defaultfor the organisation 
defaultand it is entirely up to the donor countries to decide, for example, whether they condone UNRWA’s refugee r
defaultegistration practices or not. 
default(7) 
defaultJust to demonstrate the manner in which 
defaultthe UK
default support of some of UNRWA’s practices is an obstacle to peace, it is useful to compare it to 
defaultthe policy of 
defaultthe UK
default towards the Jewish settlements in the West Bank
default, which 
defaultit
default tre
defaultat
defaults
default as a clear obstacle to peace. If Western countries 
defaultpolicies 
defaulttowards the Jewish settlements in the West Bank
default were 
defaultsimilar to
default their policy towards the Palestinian refugees as shaped by UNRWA, 
defaultthey
default would go as follows: ‘Go ahead Israel, build as many sett
defaultlements as you want and keep expanding them in perpetuity. We will accept the settlements as a natural expansion of Israel. We will even support the expansion effort financially. Don’t tell the settlers that they will ever need to leave their homes, teach 
defaultthem that it is their legal right to be there. We trust that when the day comes to negotiate peace with the Arab world you will do so in good faith and in a way that guarantees the existence of a sovereign and contiguous Arab state in Gaza and the West Ban
defaultk.’
default(8) As it stands right now the policy of 
defaultthe UK
default towards UNRWA is precisely that – it is essentially telling the Arab world: ‘Go ahead and keep inflating the numbers of refugees in perpetuity by registering descendants of refugees as refugees themselves
default. Register them as refugees from Palestine even though they were born and are living in the Palestinian Authority. Allow them to maintain both a refugee status and citizenship from a third country. Keep telling them that even though they were born in Gaza 
defaultand Ramallah, they are actually from Ashdod and Ashkelon and can realistically expect to live there soon. Keep them in a discriminated-against state in Syria and Lebanon, where their basic human rights are denied, just so they can keep the conflict alive. 
defaultWe trust that when the day comes to negotiate a final settlement with Israel, you will do so in good 
defaultfaith in a way that guarantees the coherence and existence of a 
defaulthomeland for the Jewish
default.’
default(9) If the first policy appears preposterous to 
defaultthe UK government
default,
default wh
defaultich
default support
defaults
default peace by means of a two-state solution, 
defaultthen so should the second
default. If 
defaultthe UK
default truly want
defaults
default to remove obstacles on the road to peace 
defaultit
default cannot condemn the growth of settlements on one hand and condone the manufactured growth of the number of refugees on the other. Either 
defaultboth
default the growth of settlements and the inflation in the number of refugees should be treated as obstacles to peace, or 
defaultneither should be. Moreover, whereas Israel has demonstrated time and again that for peace with Egypt – and for much less than peace in Gaza and the northern West Bank – it will ruthlessly and effectively uproot settlements, the Palestinians have yet to de
defaultmonstrate that they are willing to take even the smallest steps to give the refugee issue its true and proper proportions.
defaultThe Path 
defaultto Peace
default(10) 
defaultIf the 
defaultUK 
defaulttruly wants to promote a coherent policy that supports a two-state solution and does not favour one 
defaultside over another, it should
default use its power as the financial 
defaultsupporter of UNRWA to steer its practices along a more
default constructive path in the following manner:
default(I) 
defaultThe welfare, education and health services provided by UNRWA could continue and even be expand
defaulted, but their provision should be based on need, not refugee status.
default(II) 
defaultIn Gaza, where there is no Israeli presence and which is clearly part of Palestine, the continued registration of Palestinians living in Palestine as refugees should be discontinued.
default 
default(III) 
defaultIn the West Bank, in the areas under Palestinian Authority control, the funds currently going to UNRWA should go to the Palestinian Authority for the provision of services, while the designation of the citizens of the Palestinian Authority as refug
defaultees should also be discontinued. 
default(IV) Finally, outside the West Bank and Gaza, UNRWA’s work should be merged with that of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and operate on the same basis as all other refugees in the world, with efforts directed at secu
defaultring the equal rights of the descendants in Lebanon and Syria where they were born and have lived their entire lives.
default&#xa0;
defaultContact details: Einat Wilf
defaulteinat@wilf.org
default+972-52-45899
default67
default&#xa0;
default