&#xa0;
defaultSubmission defaultby Elizabeth Tyson LLB (defaultHonsdefault) AFOCAE, Doctoral Researcher, School of Law, University of EssexdefaultThis submission seeks to provide evidence with regard to the following question posed by the EFRA Committee:
default“
defaultWhether the existing regulatory framework and Code of Practice offer adequate protection for the wdefaultelfare of primates kept as petsdefault and are being applied effectivelydefault”default. 
defaultSpecifically, this 
defaultsubmission
default seeks to:
defaultAuthor’s interest in the issuedefault:
default I am a doctoral researcher 
defaultwhose research considers
default the protection of animals 
defaultunder UK law
default. In addition, I have a number of years’ experience working with primates rescued from the pet trade, both in the UK and abroad. I am trustee of a primate conservation 
defaultcharity
default and have been involved in work relating to primate welfare and conservation for almost a decade.
defaultThere are a number of pieces of legislation which govern the keeping of primates in private hands. For the purposes of this 
defaultsubmission
default, only those that seek to protect the 
defaultwelfaredefault of privately kept primates will be considered as relevant.
defaultThe trade in some primate species may be governed by the 
defaultControl of Trade in Endangered Species (Enforcement) Regulations (COTES)default, which enforce 
defaultEU Council Regulation (EC) No 338/97default in relation to the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species. This legislation, however, contains no animal welfare provisions
default.
defaultWhilst this
default legislation is “primarily concerned with the protection of the public from those kept animals considered to be dangerous”
default 
defaultthe 
defaultDangerous Wild Animals Act 1976default contains some provisions which impact upon 
defaultthe welfare of some species of privately kept primates. Subsections
default 1 (3) (c) – (f) 
defaultof the Act 
defaultcontain basic requirements that accommodation, adequate food, drink and bedding, provision for animals in the case of emergency, prevention of spread of disease and 
defaultspace for exercise are provided for animals belonging to species included in the schedule of the Act.
defaultFurthermore, for those animals covered by the 1976 Act, there is an obligation placed upon the owner by s. 1 (1) of the Act to obtain a licence in order to keep that animal
default and that licensing regime is underpinned by a regime of inspection
default. 
defaultHowever, this
default legislation only applies to specific species of primate deemed “dangerous” and listed in the Act’s associated schedule
default. A number of s
defaultmaller, more commonly-kept 
defaultprimate 
defaultspecies
default have been removed from the schedule in recent years. The result of this is that, at present, whilst most 
defaultspeciesdefault of primate are governed by the 1976 Act, the majority of 
defaultindividualdefault primates kept privately belong to species which are no longer covered. For these reasons, the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 
default1976 
defaultcannot be considered to be an effective legal mechanism for the protection of the welfare of privately kept primates in the UK.
defaultThe 
defaultAnimal Welfare Act 2006default applies to any vertebrate animal (other than man) provided it is; of a kind which is commonly domesticated in the British Islands; is under the control of man whether on a permanent or temporary basis; or is not living in a wild state
default. As such, its provisions apply to all privately kept primates.  As the title suggests, the purpose of the Act is “to make provision about animal welfare; and for connected purposes”
default. 
defaultIn the absence of any other specific legislation, the Animal Welfare Act 2006 can be considered to provide the main source of legal welfare protection for privately kept primates.
default2.1 Section 9 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006defaultThe Animal Welfare Act 2006 imposes obligations on those with responsibility for animals to ensure welfare needs are met. 
defaultSection 9 (2) provides a legal interpretation of what the needs of an animal entails, as follows:
defaultFor the purposes of this Act, an animal's needs shall be taken to include—
default (a) its need for a suitable environment;
default(b) its need for a suitable diet;
default(c) its need to be able to exhibit normal behaviour patterns;
default(d) any need it has to be housed with, or apart from, other animals; and
default(e) its need to be protected from pain, suffering, injury and disease. 
defaultBearing in mind that the 2006 Act protects a huge number of species and individuals, it stands to reason that the interpretation of the needs outlined in s. 9
default 
default(2) will differ quite drastically dependent upon the species (and individual) in question. 
defaultSection
default 14 grants the appropriate national authority
default power to implement codes of practice “
defaultfor the purpose of providing practical guidance in respect of any provision made by or under [the] Act
default”
default. A
default number of specific codes 
default(for dogs, cats, equines and non-human primates) 
defaulthave been implemented in order to offer guidance on fulfilment 
defaultof 
defaultthe broad terms of s
defaultection
default 9
default 
default(2) in relation 
defaultto those animals
default. 
defaultWhilst the codes are not directly enforceable, section 14 (4) of the Act states:
default(a)failure to comply with a relevant provision of a code of practice issued under this section may be relied upon as tending to establish liability, and
default(b)compliance with a relevant provision of such a code of practice may be relied upon as tending to negative liability.
defaultThe
default purpose of the codes is to give meaning and clarity to the legislation. This helps owners to understand their obligations under the law and relevant authorities to understand and enforce those obligations.
defaultPrivately kept non-human primates
default 
defaultmust 
defaulthave their 
defaultwelfare 
defaultneeds met (to the extent that is required by good practice) in relation to their environment, their diet, their behaviour, their social requirements and their health. This protection is 
defaulttheoretically 
defaultdelivered by virtue of the obligations placed on owners by section 9 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006 and, specifically section 9 (2). The obligations under section 9 (2) are informed by the
default Primate Code
default, which was introduced in 2010 using powers granted to the 
defaultappropriate national authority
default under section 14 of the 2006 Act. 
defaultThe code acts as “
defaulta guide to the steps a keeper of primates must take to meet the needs of an animal as required by Section 9 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006
default”.
defaultIt is
default vital that 
defaultcodes of practice
default are easily interpreted in line with the legal demands to which they relate 
default(the implementation of s. 9) 
defaultand that they are as prescriptive and unambiguous as possible. Ambiguity could prevent both defence and prosecution in any court proceedings from being able to demonstrate compliance (or non-compliance) with any code. In turn, this may prevent parties from being able to rely upon the codes in order to establish liability or negative liability, as outlined in s. 14 (4)
default of the Act
default. This would, arguably, negate the introduction of the code in question altogether.
defaultThe codes of practice for equines, dogs and cats appear to meet the requirement for unambiguous guidance well. They deal with one species of animal (or in the case of the equine code, few species with almost identical welfare needs), link all sections of the code to the relevant section of the Animal Welfare Act 
default2006 
defaultand use clear language which is easily understood. The codes are written in such a way that someone who had never cared for an animal of this species before would be in possession of a fairly comprehensive overview of how to comply with the law and, in the case that legal proceedings 
defaultwere
default brought against them, there are clear provisions which would allow the court to establish with some certainty whether or not the code has been complied with.
default The Primate Code, it is argued, does not meet the same criteria.
defaultUnlike the codes for dogs, cats and horses, the 
defaultPrimate Code
default seeks to provide guidance for the keeping of all and any of the 430+ species of primate. Different species of primate have significantly different needs 
defaultfrom
default one another and yet the code seeks to encompass the needs of all of them as part of the same guidance. To put this into perspective
default:
defaultDiffering needs can be recognised even in the above very short descriptions of these species alone
default;
default which are just 
defaulttwo
default of the many currently kept in the UK. This indicates the difficulty inherent in creating a code which accommodates all species and their needs whilst attempting to guarantee some level of legal certainty for thos
defaulte relying upon it for guidance 
defaultor as part of legal proceedings. The obvious result of attempting to create all-encompassing guidance to cover all the welfare needs of all primate species is ambiguity. 
defaultJust one example of the many ambiguous provisions in the code is provided below:
default1.5 Primates should display the full range of physical activities appropriate to the species concerned. These include, but are not limited to, walking, running, climbing, turning, reaching, stretching, bending, pushing, pulling, swinging, jumping.
default• Primates display a wide range of physical activities. For example, tarsiers, some lemurs and bush-babies typically cling to and leap between perches, marmosets and 
defaulttamarins
default cling to tree-trunks and gibbons swing from branch to branch. 
defaultPerformance of such natural activities benefits both the physical and psychological health of primates, and it is important that they are provided with a wide variety of appropriate facilities, of a suitable size and spatial design to display these behaviours.
default• A change in activity levels, in both directions, can be indicative of a welfare problem.
defaultWithout an existing knowledge of the complex needs of the species of primate being cared for, the interpretation of the above passage can, and will, vary drastically between owners. The range of physical activities for the species any particular owner may need to provide for is not clear, the 
defaultextent to which they need to be provided is not clear and the suggestion that too much or too little activity may be problematic leaves the owner in an uncertain position with regard to how to comply with the law. In turn, this means that an owner who has not complied with the law but can show that he or she 
defaultattempteddefault to meet the needs outlined in the code to the best of his or her ability 
defaultarguably 
defaulthas a strong defence under 14(4)(b) 
defaultof the 
defaultAct. 
defaultIn relation to enclosures, the
default P
defaultrimate
default C
defaultode states:
defaultIndoor and outdoor enclosures should be of a suitable size, and should also include sufficient vertical space appropriate to the size and social needs of the species. “Suitable” and “sufficient” mean that the welfare outcomes described in the first section of this Code are met.
defaultThe “welfare outcomes” section of the code referred to in the passage above states that: 
default“
defaultConsiderable research will be required to gain the requisite knowledge to care for individual primates adequately, and thus meet the welfare outcomes outlined here
default”
default.
default The terms “sufficient” and “suitable” are repeated throughout the guidance, suggesting that the need for “considerable research” is something which is necessary before a large number of the code’s provisions can be effectively interpreted and understood.
defaultFrom the point of view of ensuring that welfare standards are delivered in practice, it appears sensible to suggest that owners carry out independent research into the specific needs of the animals under their care. From a legal perspective, however, the fact that vital information in relation to how to meet the animals’ welfare needs (and thus fulfil the requirements of s. 9 of the Animal Welfare Act 2006) is not contained within the code itself is problematic for both enforcement agencies and owners. 
defaultIt stands to reason that, before being able to use the code during legal proceedings, enforcement agencies would be required to carry out “considerable research” in order to effectively interpret the code itself. Equally, owners would be required to demonstrate that “considerable research” has been carried out in order to defend themselves during such proceedings. This arguably places both owners and enforcement agencies in a similar position to that which they would have found themselves in prior to the introduction of the code
default. Prior to its introduction, 
defaultit was recognised that courts were ill-equipped to carry out enforcement action due to the lack of understanding of the specialised needs of primates and owners were relying upon external, and potentially unreliable, sources of information to inform their actions.
defaultIn light of the above, it is possible that prosecutions brought under the Act would be withdrawn or fail in cases when breach of the legislation was not immediately obvious. In the Impact Assessment relating to the code, it was recognised that charges relating to primates were withdrawn in three cases between 2003 and 2005. It was recognised that: “
defaultWith such a high proportion of cases being withdrawn it is possible that more guidance for the courts and owners/keepers on how to meet the welfare needs of primates would be helpful
default”. It is argued that the code of practice fails to offer this guidance in any meaningful way to courts or owners due to the continued reliance on the need for external research in order to aid its interpretation. 
defaultThe
default 
defaultPrimate Code
default fails to make clear which section of the Act the provisions of the guidance relate to. Boxed information and checklists are included as part of the document plus lists of “key resource considerations” which make repeated reference to terms which are 
defaultnot
default defined as part of the code, or elsewhere. These factors add to the difficulty in interpreting and understanding the code as a legal document and in direct correspondence with the legal requirements that 
defaultit
default seek
defaults
default to give clarity to. 
defaultThe keeping of the vast majority of individual primates in private hands is not governed by any system of licensing, monitoring or assessment. It was recognised by Government during the development of the 
defaultPrimate C
defaultode that the removal of certain species from the schedule of the Dangerous Wild Animals Act 1976 had given rise to concern that welfare provision would be compromised “
defaultbecause there was no longer any official regular annual checks
default”
default. It remains unclear how the 
defaultP
defaultrimate 
defaultCode, 
defaultwhich was
default deemed by Government to be “
defaulta light touch
default”
default,
default could 
defaultpossibly 
defaultremedy these concerns. It stands to reason if primates are kept in private homes 
defaultand no registration, monitoring or inspection is carried out
default, then the enforcement of any code of practice for their welfare becomes something of a moot point on the basis that it is near impossible to identify the animals to which the code applies in the first instance.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe code of practice has been in place for 
defaultover 
defaultthree years and was introduced in response to a recognised lack of understanding on the part of owners and enforcement agencies as to the complex needs of non-human primates. It was confirmed by the Animal Welfare Minister
default last year
default 
defaultthat
default there have been a very low number of prosecutions since its introduction; this is despite the fact that research by leading primate welfare organisations suggests that the trade in 
defaultpet 
defaultprimates is on the increase. 
defaultIt has been 
defaultargued 
defaultin this submission 
defaultthat
default,
default as a result of the flaws identified in the 
defaultPrimate Code
default and the 
defaultabsence
default of 
defaultany meaningful assessment or
default enforcement mechanisms
default, 
default the current legislation which seeks to protect the welfare of privately kept non-human primates is unfit for purpose
default. As such, 
defaultprimates currently kept 
defaultprivately
default in the UK are 
defaulteffectively un
defaultprotected by the law. 
defaultIt has been accepted by G
defaultovernment that primates should not be kept as pets in the traditional 
defaultsense. It has
default 
defaultlong been accepted that there are
default a nu
defaultmber of primates being kept as pets in the UK and it is further suggested that the trade is on the increase. Whilst this submission does not seek to outline detailed arguments relating to how a ban on the keeping of or trade in primates as pets might be implemented, the author suggests that prohibition on the trade in, and keeping of, primates privately is the only viable solution.
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default Impact Assessment of the Code of Practice on the welfare of Privately Kept Non-human Primates, Defra, 2009, p.5
default Marmosets, certain 
defaulttamarin
default species and squirrel monkeys
default S. 1 (2) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006
default Animal Welfare Act 2006
default In England, this refers to the Secretary of State and in Wales, the National Assembly of Wales
default S. 14 (1) of the Animal Welfare Act 2006
default Impact Assessment of the Code of Practice on the welfare of Privately Kept Non-human Primates, Defra, 2009, p.5
defaultImpact Assessment of the Code of Practice on the welfare of Privately Kept Non-human Primates, Defra, 2009, p.1
default