&#xa0;
defaultSubmission by The Captive Animals’ Protection Society, UKdefaultExecutive SummarydefaultThe EFRA Committee has asked for evidence regarding three specific points of interest, as follows:
defaultThis submission seeks to provide 
defaultcomment
default with 
defaultregard to the second and third points only as our organisation does not hold information on 
defaultthe extent of the trade
default in primates as pets in the UK. It is, however, 
defaultunderstood that evidence with regard to the extent of the trade will be submitted by other re
defaultspondents to this i
defaultnquiry.
defaultOur organisation strongly advocates a complete ban on the trade in, and keeping of, non-human primates privately based on the firm belief that the complex welfare needs of non-human primates cannot be met in private hands.
defaultAbout defaultthe Captive Animals’ Protection Society:default defaultFounded in 1957, the Captive Animals’ Protection Society (CAPS) is one of the UK’s longest-running charities working to protect animals. Working alongside campaign partners, CAPS has supported the call for a ban on 
defaultthe keeping of primates as pets for a number of years. Members of the CAPS team have long-term experience working with rescued primates as well as with primate conservation organisations worldwide.
defaultEvidence to support a ban on the trade in, and keeping of,default non-human primates privatelydefaultOur organisation 
defaultmaintains
default that:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIn light of all of the above, we believe that the 
defaulttrade in, and 
defaultkeeping of
default,
default primates privately must be prohibited. It is recognised that this prohibition might be introduced using a number of different mechanisms, which would need to be considered upon their own merits in due course. 
defaultWhilst 
defaultit is recognised that some private kee
defaultpers may differentiate themselves from 
default“
defaultpet owners
default”
default by virtue of their experi
defaultence in keeping these animals, w
defaulte reject any suggestion that exceptions should be made for those keepers
default in the case that prohibition is brought forward. This assertion is made
default on
default the basis that, if primates are inherently unsuited to being kept privately, the experience of the keepers in question is irrelevant. 
defaultGiven that there are estimated to be between 
default3,006 to 9,017
default 
defaultprimates held in private hands at present
default, it is 
defaultaccepted
default that a 
default“
defaultgrandfather clause
default”
default may be necessary
default in the case that any prohibition is brought forward
default. This may be necessary in order to 
defaultaccommodate those who keep primates privately in standards that are currently deemed to be acceptable in law so as to avoid
default criminalising the operation 
defaultof 
defaultlegitimate sanctuaries, seeing licensed zoos being inundated with primates or seeing individual primates euthanized in large numbers.
default The way in which any grandfather clause might operate, much like the mechanism for introdu
defaultcing any ban, is something which should be considered on its merits in due course.
defaultIt is recognised that the introduction on a ban on the keeping of primates privately will present some obstacles and complications but 
defaultwe firmly believe 
defaultthat this should not
default be used as a reason to take no action on this matter. 
defaultThe UK prides itself on being a nation of animal love
defaultrs but
default continuing to allow the keeping 
defaultof 
defaultanimals with such complex physical, social, emotional and behavioural needs in private hands 
defaultis to underm
defaultine our reputation as a leader in animal welfare protection. 
defaultFinally, it should be recognised that there are a number of expert organisations in the UK which are willing and able to work with Government in the development and delivery of any ban in the in
defaultterests of reaching the best possible outcome for the animals involved.
defaultJanuary 2014 
default&#xa0;
default ICM Research 2013
default (Documentation available upon request)
default RSPCA 2013
default (
defaulthttp://www.rspca.org.uk/allaboutanimals/pets/other/primates
default)
default 
default