&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Meet Middle East through Technologydefault&#xa0;defaultSECTION 1: Executive Summarydefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultSECTION 2: Introductiondefault1. The Israeli-Pal
defaultestinian conflict is arguably one of the most complex and contentious international disputes of our time
default. 
defaultThe British Government is committed to bringing about a negotiated two-state solution 
defaultresulting in a secure and universally recognized Israeli living 
defaultalongside a sovereign and viable Palestinian state
default. 
defaultThe UK spends approximately 90 million GBP per year in Israel and the OPTs, with the vast majority understandably going to the latter. In addition to promoting economic growth in the Palestinian Territory
default, the UK funds several advocacy-based organizations through its Interdepartmental Conflict Pool.  
default2
default. Given the dire needs of Palestinians living in the 
defaultOPTs
default and the understanding that building-up Palestinian infrastructure and promoting economic growth is the only way to ensure that the future Palestinian state will be an effective partner for peace, MEET does not take issu
defaulte with the UK’s budget breakdown in 
defaultwhich majority of its funds are aimed at development in the OPTs
default. We do, however, support the senior Parliamentary Committee’s inquiry into whether the Conflict Pool is administered effectively; and 
defaultwe agree with the notion that it ought to shift its focus
default from advocacy projects to programs that bring together Israelis and Palestinians
default in meaningful and sustainable ways
default.
default3. While advocacy is an important and effective tool in bringing about social change, it ignores the increasing need – and high-impact opp
defaultortunity – to build bridges between Israelis and Palestinians. Rather than continuing to pour limited resources into advocacy organizations, it is preferable that the Conflict Pool funds include support for groups that promote sustainable cross-border part
defaultnerships between Israelis and Palestinians to instigate real impact. On the ground, Israelis and Palestinians have little to no contact with one another, and their perceptions are primarily fueled by horrific events of the past and the media’s harsh polari
defaultzation. The current isolation and dehumanization has caused both sides to become apathetic to the other’s needs and fears. With growing disillusionment on both sides, specifically amongst youth, cultivating cross-border relationships is now harder and more
default pressing than ever. A peaceful and economically successful future for Palestinians and Israelis will depend on our ability to generate a motivated cadre of leaders prepared, committed and able to work collectively to address the complex issues of their in
defaultdividual and collective societies.
default4. The lack of bi-national networks of Palestinians and Israelis who share the motivation and capacity to work together towards solving mutual problems is a major challenge on the way to achieving a nonviolent resolution 
defaultof the conflict. 
defaultIn the current reality, the absence of shared networks and sustained opportunities to interact severely limits the abilities of 
defaultthese 
defaultPalestinian and Israeli youth (the future leaders of our region) to build the trust and cultivate the rel
defaultationships needed to work effectively on joint goals and to solve common challenges. 
defaultA 
defaultpeaceful resolution of the conflict will rely on our ability to build lasting bridges between young Palestinians and Israelis, utilizing our common resources to create p
defaultartnerships built on positive, pragmatic change in the region.
default5. At MEET, we believe that the main way to strengthen isolated Israeli and Palestinian communities is to work together on shared interests by securing high-skilled, academic, employment and en
defaulttrepreneurship opportunities for Israeli and Palestinian youth. MEET is an innovative program aimed at educating and empowering tomorrow’s most promising Israeli and Palestinian leaders. Working together with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT)
default since 2004, MEET’s goal is to develop an active professional network among
default its excellening
default students, while empowering them to i
defaultndividually and collectively 
defaultcreate positive economic, political and social change within their communities and, eventually, the
default Middle East. In 2014, over 400 youth will be working together towards this goal
default.
default 
defaultSdefaultECTIONdefault 3: Factual InformationdefaultAbout MEET
default6
default. MEET is a three-year educational program that brings together Israeli and Palestinian young leaders through the common language
defaults
default of computer science and entrepreneurship. 
defaultReferenced by US President Obama as an example of 
defaulthow
default 
defaultinnovation is reshaping the Middle East, MEET
default is managed and run by a devoted professional team – Israeli and Palestinian 
defaultC
defaulto-
defaultCEOs
default 
defaultand a bi-national staff – as 
defaultwell as a large group of international volunteers from MIT 
default(Massachusetts Institute of Technology) 
defaultand the Middle East
default. O
defaultversight is provided by an executive board of Palestinians and Israelis. MEET has also established long
default-
defaultterm relationships with key 
defaultinstitutional partners, such as MIT, the Hebrew University, HP, Goo
defaultgle 
defaultand others.
default In this way, MEET models the 
defaultcross-border 
defaultnetwork that we believe is critical to a pathway to peac
defaulte, and all too rare in the current environment
default.
default 
defaultWe
default employ a “learn-by-doing
default” approach that challenges students to move beyond theory and to engage in hands-on activities. Students are 
defaulttaught
default 
defaultto think big while working together on real
default-world
default projects with leading companies. The program comprises two stages: 1) the Student Program 
defaultwhich runs in parallel to high school over the course of three years; and 2) the Alumni Program, which ensures the achievement of MEET’s long-term mission. The entire program incorporates a values-based ‘Deeper Understanding’ curriculum focused on dialogue
default and conflict resolution.
defaultStudent Recruitment
default7
default. The selection of participants is comprised of a 
defaultsix
default-month recruitment process that engages 
defaultPalestinian and Israeli
default 
defaulthigh school
default students 
defaultand identifies the top candidates to participate in the three-year prog
defaultram, ensuring equal representation of Israelis and Palestinians; males and females. Students are recruited from over 40 high schools from East and West Jerusalem, Ramallah, Bethlehem, Mevesseret, Beit Shemesh, Nazareth and more
default, engaging the OPT population
defaults central to the Conflict Pool
default. Applicants undergo a rigorous selection process, including a written exam, a group dynamics session and a personal interview. As an excellence 
defaultmodel, admittance is highly competitive (in 2013, 999 students applied while MEET
default only accepted 70 participants). All students receive a full scholarship, regardless of 
defaultsocio-economic background
default.
default This means youth populations who would otherwise never meet, let alone collaborate, have 
defaultequal access to world-class education and empowermen
defaultt towards a common goal of
default a
default peace
defaultful future based on positive economic, political and social change
default.
default 
defaultStudent Program
default8
default. 
defaultThe three-year 
defaultStudent P
defaultrogram begins with an intensive summer course taught by volunteer instructors from MIT at the Hebrew Universit
defaulty of Jerusalem
default. Participants learn the
default basics of teamwork, business, technology and leadership. 
defaultS
defaulttudents meet during 
defaultthe school year, after school 
defaultfor 3.5 hours each week 
defaultat our tech hubs in Jerusalem and Nazareth to learn advanced technology skills and work on joint projects. Based on methodical research and practical evidence, as well as 
default10
default 
defaultyears of experience in the field, 
defaultMEET employs a strength-based conception of yout
defaulth development, recognizing their potential to impact society and alter social frameworks.
default Our academic model was designed by experts in the fields of education, business, technology, entrepreneurship, conflict resolution and dialogue.
default9
default. The academic level
default at ME
defaultE
defaultT is highly challenging. 
defaultStudents engage in over 800 
defaultacademic 
defaulthours, 
defaultproviding them with high-level computer science, entrepreneurship and leadership skills. 
defaultDealing with high standards and demand
defaults
default helps students to develop 
defaultcritical thinking, 
defaultproble
defaultm solving
default and work ethic
default, which translate into thinking creatively 
defaultabout changing the Palestinian-Israeli status quo
default. Exposure to the 
defaultcomputer 
defaultprogramming work has encouraged students to enroll in computer studies in school, affording them increased opport
defaultunities for personal academic enrichment and professional advancement
default – of particular benefit to students in the OPTs who often do not have access to this quality of computer science
default. Students have remarked that the program made them ‘learn how to learn’, 
defaultboth individually and by seeking the assistance of others.
default10
default. Teamwork is one of the primary tools in the program’s work model and its main objective is to encourage 
defaultcollaboration
default between students from different groups. The integration between Israelis an
defaultd Palestinians poses a chall
defaultenge for most students
default, as it requires them to contend with contradicting opinions and even carry out decisions taken by the group that run contrary to their own preferences. The most successful teams are usually those that have
default talked through the difficulties and have undergone a mutual process from beginning to end. Evaluations demonstrate that the degree of cooperation substantially increases with familiarity and experience. Dealing with these challenges is a significant educa
defaulttional and personal process for students. Throughout the course, 
defaultparticipants learn how to contend with opinions and positions that are different, at times even contradictory, to their own, to conduct themselves as a group that affords equal importance to 
defaulta variety of opinions, and to move forward by 
defaultpersuading 
defaultothers
default to adopt a fresh viewpoint
default. Evaluations demonstrate that the longer students have been participating in the program, the more at ease they are working with members of other teams.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultDeeper Und
defaulterstanding
default Curriculum
default11
default. In addition to the academic and professional components of the program, MEET has developed a ‘Deeper Understanding’ (DU) curriculum that focuses on promoting dialogue and conflict resolution. It is a 
defaultvalues-based education that teaches youth how to communicate and deal with different subjects, such as respect, 
defaultidentity 
defaultand “the other.”
default The main purpose of these sessions is to provide students with a framework where the
defaulty can express themselves openly
default, a
defaultnd to discuss the difficulties Israelis and Palestinians
default experience
default as a means of learning and attaining tools to deal with conflict situations in real life. It allows subjects and stress points that are naturally kept under the surface to become exposed i
defaultn order to equip the youth with tools to express themselves in relation to a complex situation
default, and 
defaultexpand their critical thinking abilities as a result of 
defaultencountering new
default 
defaultperspectives
default. The direct effect of the DU sessions is that they strengthen social c
defaultonnections between students, which allows them to expand the range of topics they are able to discuss to include deeper and more sensitive subjects of a social and political nature. DU encourages students to behave in a responsible and mature manner, decre
defaultases disciplinary issues, and fosters a more productive environment. 
default12
default. Evaluations reveal that the DU sessions have a positive influence on the relationship and soci
defaultal atmosphere within the group. 
defaultS
defaulttudents recognize that it is possible to speak, argue a
defaultnd disagree while still maintaining mutual respect and civilized discourse.
default One of the most important skills acquired through these sessions is the ability to properly convey a message so that it is clear and authentic, 
defaultand expressed
default in a respectful and no
defaultn-insulting manner. These skills are designed to help with interpersonal and inter-group conflicts, and to 
defaultcultivate 
defaulthabits
default that translate into personal and professional 
defaultnorms
default in their MEET teams, 
defaultalumni ventures, 
defaulthigher education, and eventually positions
default of leadership.
defaultAlumni Program
default13
default. 
defaultT
defaulthe Alumni Program is designed to achieve our long-term mission, allowing us to continue impacting our participants 
defaultthroughout their lives and 
defaultin their academic and professional 
defaultpursuits
default. We have a gro
defaultwing network of over
default 200 alumni, 75% of whom are living in the region and actively engaged in various MEET Alumni activities. The program is comprised of three pillars: 
defaultnetwork building, pro
defaultfessional development and a bi-n
defaultational Venture Lab
default. 
defaultNetwork Building
default takes place through quarterly conferences and online platforms; 
defaultProfessional Development
default occurs via monthly workshops, courses and a 
defaultsix
default-month mentorship program; and the 
defaultVenture Lab
default (launched in partnership with Google), is a space designed to incubate t
defaultechnology, business and social projects (commissioned and self-initiated) led by the growing number of MEET alumni.
default The Venture Lab is an important 
defaultendeavor
default that allows us to affect meaningful change in the region.
default MEET alumni have already 
defaultbuilt six projec
defaultts in the Venture L
defaultab and are currently developing five projects in bi-national teams.
default 
defaultIn ad
defaultdition to enrolling in various 
defaulta
defaultlumni activities through MEET, we track our alumni as they embark on their individual academic and career paths, an investment we de
defaultem critical to understanding the long-term effectiveness of MEET’s efforts. 
defaultEffectiveness of a Long-Term Program
default15
default. 
defaultM
defaulteeting over this extended period of time 
default(three-year program and ongoing Alumni Program) 
defaultis extremely significant
default in shaping the minds an
defaultd attitudes of participants
default. Evaluations clearly demonstrate that the longer the students have been in the program, the more frequent and significant social interactions become. At a certain point in the program, trust is born through mutual familiarity an
defaultd interaction between the youth, creating a shift in the perceptions and opinions for the other group. Most students arrive at the program never having met someone from the other nationality. Many described their surprise at having discovered the many s
defaultimi
defaultlarities between themselves.
default16
default. 
defaultOne of the most significant accomplishments of the program is the participants reaching a mutual understanding that they are not essentially different from their counterparts on the other side, and that they have the abilit
defaulty to communicate with one another and connect on a personal level. MEET succeeds in overcoming the primary obstacle of perceiving others as essentially different from oneself (dehumanizing the other). During the course of the program, youth from both sides
default come to the realization that they deal with similar problems, are troubled by similar issues, and enjoy similar activities. This realization is a significant milestone for a more comprehensive social change. Understanding points of similarity creates fert
defaultile ground for the emergence of personal ties and deeper acquaintance.
default17. Both internal and external evaluations of our programs have indicated that MEET causes students to: understand each other’s narratives; care about the future of their respective and
default shared societies; commit to giving back to their communities; believe that joint Israeli and Palestinian efforts will lead to a better and more peaceful region for all; have higher self-esteem and self-confidence; and are driven to become successful in bu
defaultsiness. This coming together of communities is an important step toward building a lasting peace in the region. 
defaultBudget
defaultThe following budget calculations are based on MEET’s 2014 proposed budget, and exchange rate of 1 USD = 0.61 GBP. MEET’s proposed 2014 
defaultannual budget is $1,613,664 (£979,581); Summer Program is $597,601 (£362,776); Yearlong Program is $359,287 (£218,106); Alumni Program is $143,666 (£87,213).
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultSECTION 4: Recommendationsdefault18
default. Historic changes are sweeping the Middle East, 
defaultwhile
default the region’s youth are learning to harness the power of technology as a tool to mobilize positive social and economic change. MEET’s goal is to empower young Palestinian and Israeli leaders to leverage their bi-national and global networks, and to use edu
defaultcation as a means of promoting positive change in local Palestinian and Israeli 
defaultcommunities. We are strategically and effectively building a generation of future Israeli and Palestinian leaders who are empowered, equipped and positioned to work together on
default joint regional challenges with a clear desire to promote peaceful and positive change. Advocacy, although important in persuading governments to adopt more human policies, is not enough to ensure lasting peace in the region. The lives of Israelis and Pale
defaultstinians are inherently intertwined. We believe that youth on both sides must become professionally and personally connected through working on joint projects and acquiring a mutual set of skills and values.
default19
default. 
defaultThe MEET model has proven its strength and r
defaultesilience in the face of some of the most challenging political and economic times
default. Having invested strongly in relationship-building with students, parents, schools, and multi-national corporations, MEET has developed a strong branch name associated with 
defaultintegrity, clarity of mission, and excellence in delivering a 
defaulthigh-quality educational 
defaultprogram. Currently, we are the only long-term, local
default,
default skills-based educational 
defaultprogram
default that brings together Israeli and Pale
defaultstinian youth for the explicit
default purpose of jointly finding transformative solutions to social, economic and political problems facing both sides.
default2
default0
default. 
defaultWe believe that MEET is a strong and viable partner for the British Government in its 
defaultpursuit of a lasting peace between Israelis and Pal
defaultestinians
default. We have previously met with representatives of the British Embassy in Tel Aviv and were encouraged to submit a proposal for funding in March 2013. Unfortunately, our request was denied due to the fact that the British Embassy was considering a d
defaultifferent approach to working with NGOs in Israel and the OPTs. We hope that, based on evidence such as that provided in this document, the British government will reconsider funding projects such as ours that bring together Israelis and Palestinians to cre
defaultate positive change.
default&#xa0;
default