&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Anonymous [PCC Progress 12]
defaultStaffordshire Police and Crime CommissionerdefaultThe questions asked in the public consultation were closed to the point of making the results completely worthless.  For example ‘Do you think it is important that crime is prevented?’ and ‘Do you think it is important to support victims of crime?’.  The exact wording was slightly different but I can no longer find these questions on the PCC website.
defaultWhen members of the public raised concerns about
default approaches such as the
default’
default Victim G
defaultateway’ no response 
defaulth
defaulta
defaults been given to these concerns and they have only promoted the fact the 90 odd percent of people agreed that it is important to prevent crime
default or support victims not that the proposed approach is very flawed.
defaultThis 
defaulthas been
default a
defaultdministered appallingly with £15,000 having been allocated
default to one group 
default on the basis of a ‘chat’
default with Matthew Ellis
default prior to any other groups becoming 
defaultaware that there was funding available to be applied for.  Once it was available a whole application process was set in place with very short deadlines and little or no guidance
default provided.
default. 
defaultThe guidance notes for the application basically explained the terms used and not actually what they could apply for or how much you could apply for etc.  Some groups were told they had applied for ‘too much’ but then when they had called to get guidance on this matter were told there was no limit and some groups who received money received substantially less than they originally requested and so the PCC clearly had the ability to offer a reduced amount of funding. 
defaultEvents ha
defaultve been arranged by the PCC to discuss local matters with partners but so many groups did  not receive invites attendance has not been representative.  The Deputy PCC ran one such meeting regarding the ‘victim gateway’ idea and failed to 
defaultaccept or 
defaultappreciate contributions from ag
defaultencies that have been working in
default the County for decades
default.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default