&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultSandra Sanderson
default [PCC Progress 15]
default&#xa0;
default1. 
defaultThe role of 
defaultPolice and Crime P
defaultanels in holding their commissioners to account:
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultPCC
default in 
defaultCounty X has demonstrated a
default low level of commitment
default,
default in practice, to 
defaultequal opportunities
default.  For example: recruiting staff to his
default/her
default office without any regard to equally opportunities recruitment and selection processes, thus setting a very poor example as a senior public servant.
default&#xa0;
defaultAlso a
defaultwarding grants under the 
defaultLocal P
defaultolicing 
defaultF
defaultund: The 
defaultPCC
default gave a 
defaultsignificant grant to one local group to
default before eve
defaultn launching the application process
default.  Many local organisat
defaultions were then refused awards on
default the basis that there was insufficient funding. It is difficult to avoid the appearance of favouritism.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt
default does not appear that the Police and C
defaultrime Panel are able to hold the C
defaultommissioner to account in areas of equal opportunities and fairness.  
default&#xa0;
default2. The role of C
defaultommissione
defaultrs in budget and precept setting:  A
defaultgain the
default admini
defaultstration of the Local Policing Fund where
default a 
defaultsignificant grant
default was given out to one organisation before others where even able to access th
defaulte application form.  This gives rise to concerns around the C
defaultommissioner’s attitude to the budget.  
default&#xa0;
default3. Effectiveness of C
defaultommissioners in promoting local policing priorities:
default&#xa0;
defaultThere has been some consultation in 
defaultour area 
defaultaround the 
defaultPCC
default’s priorities.  However, the major consultation meeting was extremely disappointing for those participating.  Whereas significant dissent was expressed at the consultation meeting, the notes suggested a much greater agreement with the 
defaultPCC
default’s plans.  Further, consultation with the third sector has looked very
default much like a fait accompli.  It was very clear to everyone present
default that the 
defaultPCC
default has decided what the priorities are and it is difficult to avoid the appearance that the consultation 
defaultis merely a case of “going through th
defaulte motions.”  For instance, the C
defaultommissioner
default’s office had
default undertake
defaultn
default a “mapping exercise” of all the third sector agencies involved with crime and crime reduction work.  At the consultation meeting this 
defaultmap was produced but it did not
default include any of the
default county hate crime partnerships – despite the fact that 
defaultthese are voluntary sector led p
defaultartnerships receiving significa
defaultnt funding from the respective Crime Reduction Partnerships and the County C
defaultouncil.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe 
defaultPCC
default has made it clear that he
default/she
default fully supports the notion of a sing
defaultle gateway for victims
default his
default/her
default consultation
default with the voluntary sector appears mostly to
default focus on how this may operate, not on the more fundamental questions of whether it is desirable or necessary.  
default&#xa0;
defaultPlease note we do not feel able to identify the County as we are an organisation who will be seeking funds from the 
defaultPCC
default and fear that if he/she knows we have criticised him/her
default 
defaultin this consultation this might af
defaultfect his/her funding decisions.
default&#xa0;
defaultSandra Sanderson
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default