&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the 
defaultNorth Wales Police and Crime Panel
default [PCC Progress 25]
default&#xa0;default1. default              defaultINTRODUCTIONdefault1.1
default              
defaultOn the 6
defaultth
default November 2013, the Home Affairs Committee launched a new inquiry on Police and Crime Commissioners in order to examine the work and effectiveness of the
default newly-created
default statutory role that first took office on the 22
defaultnd
default November 2012.
default1.2
default              
defaultThis response by the North Wales Police and
default Crime Panel (NWPCP) complements
default the written submissions made by the Welsh Local Government Association (WLGA) in relation to Police and Crime Panels.  However, the NWPCP wanted to reiterate the following points:
default&#xa0;
default2.default              defaultHOLDING THE COMMISSIONER TO ACCOUNTdefault2.1
default              
defaultDuring the last year, the NWPCP has worked closely with the Police and Crime Commissioner (PCC) to develop 
defaulta good working relationship
default and whilst the NWPCP is becoming more experienced and knowledgeable, its activities to date have been mostly reactive due to the timescales involved and resources available. Whilst it is important that the NWPCP and PCC each know their own roles, it is also imperative that they understand each other’s roles and responsibilities.
default2.2
default              
defaultThere has been some confusion and consequent frustration around the role of a good Police and Crime Panel (PCP), particularly during the transition period.  Whilst the NWPCP has a good relationship with the PCC, the Home Office should provide clearer guidance on the role
defaults
default and responsibilities of a PCP, to ensure accountability, transparency and good governance. 
default              
defaultA Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) has been drafted to capture the processes between the NWPCP, PCC and North Wales Police. The MoU will be designed to outline processes and procedures together with the timelines in which they are to be achieved. In addition, there has been
default some
default confusion amongst Members of the NWPCP as to the definition of ‘operational matters’, matters upon which the PCC has no remit. 
default 2.3
default              
defaultAn area of particular concern in the
default 
defaultPolice Reform and Social Responsibility Act 2011 (Act) is the mis-match between the extensive and wide-ranging powers of the PCC and the envisaged light-touch scrutiny powers of the PCP.  In order to carry out their
default roles and
default responsibilities under the Act, it is felt that the powers the PCPs have are limited and in order to truly hold the PCC to account and provide effective challenge and scrutiny, stronger powers are required, particularly in relation to veto – a veto should mean
default a
default veto.  
default2.4
default              
defaultIt is also felt that greater resources are required in order to provide effective scrutiny and challenge.  This would enable the NWPCP to be more proactive in its role and prepare a Forward Work Programme for topics that require scrutiny to allow it 
defaultto 
defaultgather evidence and investigate the key priorities, particularly in relation to the Police and Crime Plan and precept but also over and above its key statutory functions.  This would also help support the PCC in his role and aid the development of policies.
default2.5
default              
defaultUnder the old Police A
defaultuthority reg
defaultime there would be a number of Sub-
defaultC
defaultommittees
default with remits to scrutinise different fields of practise
default within the Police Authority. 
defaultAlthough it is clear that 
defaultthe PCC has
default set up internal performance teams, it is unclear as to how the makeup of such teams is decided, how they arrive at conclusions and who if anyone other than the 
defaultPCC
default himself can scrutinise the processes used to reach 
defaultsuch conclusions
default. 
defaultIt is argued that the 
defaultprocess
defaultes are not
default transparent enough
default and there should be a 
defaultmore pro
defaultacti
defaultve role for the PCP M
defaultembers to observe 
defaultand scrutinise 
defaultthese new practises
default. Again, this links directly to 
defaultthe shortage 
defaultof funding.
default2.6
default              
defaultEarlier engagement with the PCC is needed, so that the NWPCP is made aware of the PCC’s plans and is able to scrutinise the key decisions made by the PCC. This will be particularly important when the PCC starts commissioning and decommissioning services.
default2.7
default              
defaultWhilst PCPs have limited powers in relation to the resolution of complaints, it has taken up a disproportionate amount of time and resources. Although detailed guidance has been produced by the Independent Police Complaints Commission (IPCC), the lack of experience of Host Authority members of staff dealing with such complaints has led to a tentative and some-what proliferated approach to their categorisation.
default&#xa0;default3.default              defaultENGAGEMENTdefault3
default.
default1
default              
defaultThe NWPCP recognises the need to build relationships and engage with partners, particularly the Community Safety Partnerships in the future.  This would aid the development and review of priorities around the Police and Crime Plan.
default3.2
default              
defaultThe NWPCP also recognises the need for greater engagement with the public, so they have an understanding of the roles and responsibilities of a PCP.  During the high profile incidents involving PCCs in the first year, there has been a profound misconception amongst the public as to the role and powers of the PCP. Webcasting and social media should be used to address this and educate the public by raising awareness of the role and 
defaultsomewhat 
defaultlimited powers of the PCP. In addition, this will make the PCPs more accountable to the public.
default3.3
default              
defaultPCPs should not work in a vacuum but work together across 
defaultWales
default, in order to develop and share good practice.  The WLGA has facilitated training and de
defaultvelopment days, which have been
default of great benefit to the NWPCP together with chairing the Host Authority Officers’ Group Meeting on a quarterly basis. 
default3.4 
default              
defaultThe NWPCP wishes to see the PCC progress with 
defaultestablishing collaboration agreements with other 
defaultPCCs,
default policing org
defaultanisations, local authorities, partners and key stakeholders in the field of community safety, health, social care and education. 
defaultIt is vitally important that collaborations exist with the North West of England and on an all-Wales basis.
default&#xa0;default4default.default              defaultLEGAL STATUS OF PCPs IN defaultWALESdefault4.1
default              
defaultDue to the stance of the Welsh Government and hence the legal status of PCPs in 
defaultWales
default, its funding is limited to the Home Office Grant only. This leads to an inequality of resources as PCPs in 
defaultEngland
default can draw down financial contributions from the Local Authorities that fall within its Police Force Area to supplement their budget. As a consequence, it is able to deliver greater scrutiny beyond its 
defaultkey 
defaultstatutory
default 
defaultfunctions.
default4.2
default              
defaultIt is felt that the Act could have an adverse effect on the 
defaultfuture 
defaultdevelopment of PCPs, particularly as the PCP gains more experience and focuses on their scrutiny role.  The NWPCP feels that this could limit the number of meetings per annum, which would only allow it to concentrate on its 
defaultkey 
defaultstatutory functions, such as the precept, Plan and confirmation hearings.  In addition, limited funding is stifling the creation of
default much needed
default Task &amp; Finish Groups, Sub-
defaultCommittees
default and the triangulation of PCC evidence.
default4.3
default              
defaultIn relation to transparency, the PCC does publish Decision Notices on their website. However, again due to lack of resources, the NWPCP are reactive rather than proactive in using their general powers to request information from the PCC in relation to the Decision Notices
default e.g. method used to form conclusion
default. This relates to the argument for increased resources and a dedicated Scrutiny Forward Work Programme (as many PCPs’ in England have achieved due to a greater level of funding, which has enabled them to employ dedicated members of staff to support the PCP
default and facilitate Task &amp; Finish Groups
default). For example, scrutinising the Office of the PCC to ensure they have the appropriate number of staff together with the necessary skills and expertise to perform their statutory functions e.g. commissioning, procurement, HR and legal. This would be particularly relevant if spending on consultancy and agency fees were disproportionately high.
default 
default4.4
default              
defaultThe Home Office Grant is currently split between Administration Costs
default, 
default 
defaultTranslation
default Costs and 
defaultMembers’ Expenses; the NWPCP feels that the grant should not be 
defaultdemarcated 
defaultbut pooled, and that it be up to the individual PCP 
defaultto best determine 
defaulthow the grant is spent.
default4.5
default              
defaultPCPs in 
defaultWales
default are free standing bodies, which also limits the operation of the PCPs.  Any changes to the membership have to be approved by the Home Secretary; which can be a lengthy process. As a result, nominated members have missed one or two meetings whilst the
default Host Authority for NW
defaultPCP awaits Home Secretary approval. This is not the case in 
defaultEngland
default.
default4.6 
default              
defaultPCPs currently claim their Home Office Grant on a quarterly basis, however this administrative task is very time consuming and it would be more effici
defaultent to claim on an annual basis.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultNorth Wales Police and Crime PaneldefaultDecember 2013default&#xa0;
default