&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from the defaultDepartment of Enterprise, Trade and Investmentdefault, Northern Ireland Executivedefault [FBB00105]default&#xa0;defaultCulture, Media &amp; Sport Select Committee Indefaultquiry into the Future of the BBCdefaultThe Northern Ireland Executive's Economic Strategy identifies the creative sector, in particular the Screen industries, as one of our key priority sectors. We firmly believe it has the potential to make further and substantial contributions to the development of the Northern Ireland economy.
defaultMy Department has underlined its commitment to the Screen Industries by providing over £30m of support over the past 4 years. This commitment, coupled with the creative talent that has developed locally, has delivered very real commercial success for the local Screen industry. The Executive is extremely supportive of the work of NI Screen and wishes to build on the success of productions such as Terri and Orla George's Oscar Winning "The Shore"; HBO's "Game of Thrones" and the recent BBC Drama ''The Fall".
defaultBBC commissioning can play a critical role in supporting the growth of the local screen sector by helping build a sustainable skills base, creative infrastructure and appropriate business entities within Northern Ireland.
defaultThe Select Committee will share my view that the BBC's 'Public Purposes' broadly reflect the Corporation's important position at the centre of the UK's cultural life. It is therefore disappointing that, during the last Charter Period, the BBC fell short of delivering fully against these Public Purposes in Northern Ireland. In particular, it was evident that the BBC's 'Out of London' Commissioning Strategy has had only a limited impact locally. In addition, the BBC Trust's Annual Performance Remit Survey also captured evidence that the SSC does not fulfil its obligation to 'Represent the UK, its nations and communities' as it relates to Northern Ireland.
defaultI note the absence of a simple and transparent strategy for the delivery of all 'Public Purposes' in Northern Ireland. In particular, I have been disappointed by the lack of a strategy to develop a local production Centre of Excellence which would support the drive to deliver the targets contained in the 'Out of London' commissioning strategy.
defaultI am aware that the North of England, Scotland and Wales have all received 'forced distribution' of network television production and, with that, very considerable investment in infrastructure. In Northern Ireland, we have received neither, and it is my view that, without an explicit strategy, it is difficult to envisage how the BBC can deliver locally against the full range of its 'Public Purposes'.
defaultNorthern Ireland Screen also identifies the lack of a simple and transparent strategy for Northern Ireland as one of its major challenges in partnering with the BBC. Such a strategy should not only be available for scrutiny by those responsible for governance, but it should also be available as a road map for the many executives across the Corporation nationally, and within BBC Northern Ireland, who will ultimately deliver the activities that make up the BBC's contribution to the Public Interest in Northern Ireland. Furthermore, the strategy should be linked to respective specialisms in order to clearly articulate the degree of expenditure both for infrastructure and commissioning to be targeted locally.
defaultIn addition to developing specific strategies, I would urge the Committee to also consider supporting a rationalisation of the current 25% external production quota and the separate Window of Creative Competition into a simpler 45-50% external production quota. Such an approach would clearly increase the opportunities for Northern Ireland production and post production businesses to compete for larger numbers of projects. It is my view that the BBC's objectives, as they relate to 'Stimulating Creativity and Cultural Excellence', 'Representing the UK, its nations, regions and communities', and 'Bringing the UK to the world and the world to the UK' can all be better served through independent programme supply.
defaultWe must also recognise that there are challenges associated with sustaining the license fee model given the current squeeze on household budgets. Much of the BBC's institutional stability and independence derives from the License Fee as its funding model. While this model remains viable and should be maintained, I believe it would be prudent to consider alternative business models that would complement the license fee and enable the BBC to continue to make its vital contribution in maintaining the UK's pre-eminence in the Creative Industries, particularly in TV, Radio and Online content creation and delivery.
defaultIn conclusion, I wish to reiterate the importance of the Screen Industries to the future development of the Northern Ireland economy and to underscore the important contribution that BBC commissioning can make to the growth of the sector locally.
defaultARLENE FOSTER MLA
defaultMinister of Enterprise, Trade &amp; Investment
default, Northern Ireland
default Executive
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default