&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by the European Alliance of Rescue Centres and Sanctuariesdefault (EARS)default&#xa0;
default1.1.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultMany of o
defaultur members are working
default,
default harder than ever
default,
default to deal with the negative fallout from the exotic pet trade in Europe
default, often finding themselves having to take in exotic animals that have been given up by private owners or confiscated by the au
defaultthorities. We also see first hand the conditions in which many of these animals have been kept – their owners unable or unwilling to provide for their complex species-specific needs. As a result 
defaultEARS
default strongly
default belie
defaultves that strict regulation is required for
default the keeping of wild animals 
defaultas pets
default -
default never more so 
defaultthan in the case of non-human primates, where the potential for negative animal welfare is so high. 
default1.2.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultMaintaining the welfare of any wild animal in captivity is complicated and requires specialist knowled
defaultge. The keeping of primates is a particular challenge as they are highly intelligent animals with complex needs that cannot be met without significant 
defaultexperience and skills
default. Even in the best case scenario, primates in captivity may still have their welfare impaired in some way and so the practice of doing so must always be judged by the wider benefits it incurs. 
defaultThe provision of long term sanctuary or rescue for abandoned or
default rescued animals is one example of where keeping primates can be justifiable, providing high levels of welfare can be ensured for the animals in question.
default1.3.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultAs it stands 
defaultthe only binding legislation 
defaultin the United Kingdom for the keeping of primates as pets i
defaults based on their potential threat to public safety. While this is clearly of critical importance, it pays no attention to the welfare impacts outlined above. Indeed the most commonly traded primate species in the UK are not covered in the Dangerous Wild An
defaultimals Act (19
default76)
default and so trade in them is not regulated at all.
default1.4.
default&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe keeping of wild animals as pets is becoming an issue of increasing interest to governments across Europe. In
default particular, thirteen countries have now banned the keeping of primates as pets (
defaultAustria, Bulgaria, Denmark, Estonia, France, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland, Portugal and Norway).
default 
defaultThe United Kingdom now has an opportunity to keep up with 
defaultthis
default progress being made for the protection of wild animals 
defaultacross Europe b
defaulty banning the keeping of primates as pets.
default1.5.
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultFurthermore, it is important to separate out those animals being kept as pets and those that are held under private ownership but for reasons of rescue or sanctuary. Many of our partners, in the UK and across Euro
defaultpe, care for primates in their facilities. All of them have been rescued or confiscated, none of have been bought or bred on-site. However, many of these facilities are also not open to the public. Should a ban be implemented on the keeping of primates as 
defaultpets care should be taken to ensure definitions cater for these instances – or that exemptions be made.
default 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default