&#xa0;
defaultWdefaultritten evidence submitted bydefault tdefaulthe Royal Society for the Protection of BirdsdefaultTh
defaulte order and content of this contribution reflect the terms of reference of the inquiry:
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe principal drivers of the rising number of invasive species.defaultTrade is the single most important pathway for the introduction of invasive non-native species (INNS). The growth in international trade and human transport – especially since the 1950s – is therefore a key driver of the growth in INNS. The principal factors are:
default&#xa0;
defaultThe likelihood of establishment of INNS is known to be determined by 
defaultpropaguledefault pressuredefault – the number of individuals arriving at a new site. It is a common misconception that to prevent INNS establishment every single organism must be stopped or there is no point. Action that 
defaultreduces
default the number of individuals (or seeds, growing fragments, eggs) being introduced can be highly effective at preventing problems, even if some individuals are still being released. 
defaultOther forms of human movement besides trade and transport play significant roles, e.g. ballast water movements, hull fouling, forestry, species movement for collections, etc.
defaultThe effect of increasing human movement of species
default is compou
defaultnded by environmental factors - climate change and biodiversity loss in particular. 
defaultRising 
defaultCO
default2
default concentrations, warmer temperatures, greater nitrogen deposition, altered disturbance regimes and increased habitat degradation are all known to facilitate further species invasions
default. 
default 
defaultThe adequacy of understanding and data on invasive species, and the extent of the harm they cause, to be able to devise strategies to address them.defaultScientific understanding of INNS issues generally has significantly improved in recent decades, with invasion science now a recognised and growing discipline. Moreover, practical experience in combating INNS issues around the world has developed significantly, with an 
defaultarray of successful prevention, rapid response, major eradication and long term control initiatives.  The UK has a number of active research groups but is not at present one of the world’s principal centres of expertise in academic invasion science. 
defaultSome general patterns of invasion are well understood and should be clear targets for action: for example, introducing non-native vertebrates to islands, or freshwater fish and crayfish to aquatic systems, will nearly always prove damaging and must be prevented or subject to rapid response action as a matter of high priority. Predicting invasions can sometimes be challenging, however, as there is a degree of intrinsic uncertainty: predicting which species will become invasive, and what effect they will have on ecosystems is often less than 100% precise. Risk Assessment should be conducted and interpreted in that context, and should be a dynamic exercise that builds on new understanding and experience. Specific uncertainties must not, however, hinder the establishment of general prevention and rapid response capacities, as these will be fundamental to constructing an adequate future response to INNS.
defaultPublic understanding of INNS issues is often limited. This can generate difficulties when communicating and reporting on INNS issues, and when seeking public engagement – which will often be critical with respect to preventing introductions – and in promoting vigilance and early warning capacity. Public communications and awareness campaigns on INNS – key elements of an effective response - should focus on the idea that careless species movements cause problems, and that we must all remain vigilant. 
defaultMost importantly, government and agencies must ensure that surveillance mechanisms are adequate to inform effective rapid response capacity, particularly for areas of high vulnerability (islands, freshwater bodies, river catchments) and high biodiversity value (protected areas). The precautionary principle and the economies that will arise from early action point to the benefits of a 
defaultgeneral presumption against the introduction of non native species
default and that 
defaultaction must be taken at the earliest invasion stage possible
default. We believe there are currently some important shortcomings with regard to surveillance in vulnerable areas, notably un-invaded river catchments, lakes and protected areas, and in terms of training of front-line professionals in INNS identification and action.
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe adequacy of the draft EU Regulation and its relevance to the situation in the UKdefaultThe INNS issue is fundamentally an international one. In a trading block such as the EU, if one Member State fails to implement adequate measures to prevent and combat INNS, the whole Union is put at risk. The growing number of biological invasions hitting EU countries, the risk of rapid spread and the wide spectrum of species and impacts requires a legal framework for coordinated action, for the benefit of all.
defaultDomestic arrangements with respect to INNS across EU member states are currently inadequate, with the result that national Governments are having to spend significant amounts of money to tackle the problems on their own. Worryingly, there are no means to ensure that neighbouring countries take parallel measures in order to prevent new invasions of the same or similar species. This is true even for island states such as the UK, where the number of INNS present, relative to area and human population, does not differ significantly from continental states in Europe.
defaultThe European Commission’s draft Regulation on invasive alien species, published in September 2013, is therefore a significant positive step. It is currently undergoing the co-decision process in the European Parliament and Council. Conservation NGOs welcomed the EC proposal initially but warned that it contained some key shortcomings that need to be addressed for an appropriate and environmentally sound legislation:
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultSpecific defaultToRdefault issues:defaultEstablishing a list of 
defaultinvasive alien species
default of EU concern is a potentially effective tool. However, limiting this 
default‘
defaultblacklist
default’
default to 50 species only, as proposed
default by the European Commission
default, has no scientific bas
defaultis. The arbitrary figure
default represents only 3% of the 
defaultINNS
default estimated to 
defaultalready 
defaultbe present in the EU
default and, with a demonstrably growing problem,  is clearly inadequate in scope: moreover, to be effective, the list 
defaultshould include species not yet present in Europe
default, that pose a significant risk – so notional coverage will be considerably less than 3% of the potential problem.
defaultThe original justification for proposing an arbitrary cap on the number of species was economic, yet it failed to take into account that most savings occur in the early stages of invasion. We strongly support the UK Government’s position that the cap should be lifted.
defaultIt would be wrong to see biodiversity impacts and socio-economic impacts as independent. INNS are a one of the principal drivers of biodiversity loss, and that loss impacts human welfare and economy through eroding the array ecosystem services on which people and economies depend. Moreover, specific INNS problems that are costly to the economy are often similarly costly in terms of native biodiversity. Risk Assessment is and will be a key tool in identifying potential and forthcoming problems, but it should always be interpreted with acknowledgement of a degree of intrinsic uncertainty, varying between 
defaulttaxa
default and environments. The broad patterns that we can have high confidence in should naturally help us prioritise action: islands, freshwater bodies (including rivers) and areas of high biodiversity importance should be a focus.
defaultThe Convention on Biological Diversity provides some 
defaultGuiding Principles for the prevention, introduction and mitigation of impacts of alien species that threaten ecosystems, habitats or species
default. The p
defaultriority should be given to preventing the introduction of invasive alien species, 
defaultbetween and
default 
defaultwithin States. If an invasive alien species has been introduced, early detection and rapid action are crucial
default 
defaultto prevent its establishment. The preferred response is often to eradicate the organisms as soon as
default 
defaultpossible. In the event that 
defaultrapid 
defaulteradication is not feasible, containment and long
defaulter
default-term control
default or eradication
default measures should be
default 
defaultimplemented. 
defaultAssessments
default of benefits and costs (environmental, economic and social) should be done
default 
defaulton a long-term basis.
defaultThe list of species of Union concern should be prospective and preventative – it should prioritise the listing of those potential invaders that have not become established in the EU and of those which, being present in one or several Member States, can still be prevented from further damaging spread. For these species, actions coordinated under appropriately resourced management plans in the countries where they are established should be implemented.  
defaultThe three ‘strands of response’, first laid out in the Convention on Biological Diversity and widely adopted subsequently, are intended to enshrine and facilitate a general principle in combating INNS impacts: 
defaultthat action should be taken at the defaultearliest invasion stage defaultpossibledefault.default The later action is taken, the more expensive it is in both financial and ecological terms. Thus, establishing effective mechanisms for prevention and early warning/rapid response makes great sense. It would be a fundamental mistake, however, to assume that if prevention does not happen, it is too late to do anything. 
defaultAttempting to strategically weight resource deployment broadly across these strands would prove challenging and would be likely to miss some key issues. The key word is balance. For some well-established INNS, long-term control/containment must be a priority to avoid further damage to native biodiversity and economic interests – grey squirrels, for example. If national strategy does this at the expense of establishing effective preventative and rapid response capacities, however, we will be risking heavy future expense and ecosystem damage from more recently arrived species.
defaultA list of safe species (‘White Listing’) – given our imperfect knowledge of species and community ecology, and the intrinsic uncertainties around predicting future problems – is undoubtedly the 
defaultsafest and best response to addressing issues of species movements
default. It should be the approach adopted in the longer term. However, these uncertainties mean that any list of species proven to be safe is likely to be relatively short, the regulatory burden on trade and commerce would accordingly be relatively heavy, and so this is a politically challenging approach in the context of our current state of knowledge - achieving consensus may be impossible. In this perspective, a ‘black list’ approach (regulating species known or likely to be damaging) is in our view an acceptable, if sub-optimal, approach until improved knowledge facilitates a practical white listing mechanism. However, a cap on the number of 
defaultspecies that can be listed under a black listing approach would undermine its potential efficacy so severely that it would become too weak to tackle the INNS problem significantly.
defaultThe key potential conflict at present involves the new 
defaultBiocidal
default Products Regulation (arising from the 
defaultBiocidal
default Products Directive 
default 98/8/EEC)
default which severely restricts the usage of second generation anticoagulant 
defaultrodenticides
default (SGARs).  These regulations are a welcome environmental safeguard generally, but it is imperative that derogation from these regulations is, when necessary for island restoration projects (which aim to eradicate non-native rodents from islands), simple, effective, and without financial burden. 
defaultWhen introduced onto islands, rodents are among the most damaging INNS on earth – biodiversity losses historically have been severe and remedial action (island restoration via rodent eradication) must be a core priority in the UK and elsewhere.
defaultIsland restoration projects are an essential tool for delivering international conservation obligations. 
defaultHSE
default have confirmed that limiting SGAR use for such projects is an unintended consequence of the new system. 
defaultAt present, however, the 
defaultBiocidal
default Products Regulation would appear to be an obstacle and significant risk to this important conservation work.
defaultThe RSPB is in discussion with the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) in this regard, but our experience to date indicates that the process of obtaining a derogation will be time-consuming and costly and not necessarily fit for purpose (particularly if reinvasion occurs).
defaultWe 
defaulturge the Government to introduce a revised system
default for 
defaultapproving 
defaultrodenticide
default use 
defaultfor
default island restoration projects carried out by recognised conservation bodies
default,
default and under strict protocols for the benefit of our wildlife
default.
defaultThe establishment in 2008 of the Invasive Non-native Species Framework Strategy for Great Britain was a welcome expression of Government intent to tackle the problems caused by INNS and to prevent the establishment and further spread of new populations. It has positioned GB as a leader in the field in a number of key areas  - for example, the risk assessment methodology devised/used in GB has been selected by the European Commission as a model for the Union.  However, in other areas, progress has been slow, and it is vital that, irrespective of developments at EU level, Defra and the GB Non-native Species Secretariat make full use of the opportunity provided by the current GB Strategy review to make further improvements.   The new strategy must invest more in identifying and tackling pathways of invasion, ensuring appropriate rapid response mechanisms are in place, and shifting emphasis from risk assessment (though still clearly required) to risk 
defaultmanagement
default – i.e. prioritising and then undertaking action to tackle particular species, which otherwise appears to take place in a rather haphazard and frequently opaque fashion.  
defaultThe UK Government has proposed the following amendment to the European Commission draft text – (Art. 7(4)): 
default“Member States may maintain or lay down more stringent national rules with the aim of preventing the introduction, establishment and spread of invasive alien species”
default.  
defaultThe RSPB supports this amendment and urges the Government to bring forward plans to reform domestic law
default and not wait for or be limited by the EU process (see 8 below).
default 
defaultThe key potential benefit for the UK in the current proposal is that it would help to bring our EU trading partners up to a standard that approaches that in the UK. The UK should instigate a strategic programme of INNS remedial actions, make full use of the proposed Lists of MS Concern, should encourage public awareness campaigns and training for workers in key pathway roles, and should invest (and encourage the EU to invest) in scientific INNS research to facilitate a progression towards a genuinely sustainable position, where INNS establishment rates and damaging impacts decline.
defaultUK Overseas Territories:
defaultThe draft EU IAS Regulation will not cover the UK Overseas Territories (OTs). Invasive species are however one of the primary drivers of biodiversity loss on the Territories, and the UK strategy must include recognition of these overlooked and vulnerable environments. At present, new species continue to arrive and spread in the Territories, with in many cases no surveillance or monitoring. There are also weaknesses in legislation, implementation and technical expertise, with some Territories having particularly pressing gaps 
default- 
defaulte.g. Pitcairn has no 
defaultbiosecurity
default legislation, whilst Tristan 
defaultda
default Cunha lacks a secure facility for the inspection and destruction of high-risk goods. Many Territories are unable to fill the gaps in their 
defaultbiosecurity
default systems without external support. 
defaultAt present, Defra supports a Pest Identification Service for the OTs, which is of considerable proven value for these small jurisdictions and must be continued. There is an urgent need for a much more proactive and strategic approach however. The UK should assist Territories with assessing and addressing the pathways for the importation of new species, and provide them with further technical and financial support to address the most pressing gaps in 
defaultbiosecurity
default frameworks. The GB Non-Native Species 
defaultProgramme Board,
default meanwhile
default,
default should be directed to provide more proactive support to the OTs.
defaultWe support the promotion of domestic production to minimise the need for species importation to the UK. Specific measures should prioritise minimising imports of organisms (
defaulteg
default amphibians and plants, especially trees), that – though the species concerned may be native to the UK – may carry pathogens that are not established in UK populations. 
defaultThe case for any change in the law regarding invasive species.defaultThe case for reform of the legislation relating to invasive non-native species (INNS) in England and Wales is compelling.  INNS
default are one of the principal causes of species extinctions and one of t
defaulthe five main drivers of global biodiversity loss, alongside habitat 
defaultchange, climate change, overexploitation and pollution
default.  Despite this, and their estimated cost to the UK economy of £1.7 billion annually
default, i
defaultt is widely acknowledged that the existing legislative framework relating to INNS in England and Wales is inadequate to deal with this escalating issue.  The inclusion of INNS in the recent Law Commission review of 
defaultwildife
default management law in England and Wales was therefore timely.
defaultSome serious omissions under the existing statutory provisions need urgent correction.  For example, firstly the functional definition of ‘non-native’ (as found in s14(1)) of the Wildlife And Countryside Act 1981) currently omits species that are native to one part of Great Britain and that are released in, or escape to, areas where they are not n
defaultative (
defaulte.g
default hedgehogs on
default islands, and resulting impacts on ground-nesting birds).  Secondly, the current statutory provisions fail to prevent future problem introductions, and fail to provide adequate regulatory tools to control, contain or eradicate species already established (criminal offences such as those in s14(1) only deal with the "horse after it has bolted").  
defaultWe believe that INNS legislation should take the approach of broad regulation of release of non-native species, coupled with listed exempt circumstances and activities.  Such measures should be combined with a duty on (named) public bodies to investigate and instigate control measures on the most dangerous INNS.  Lines of responsibility must be determined within statute – without this, the ability to act quickly and decisively at the earliest stage of invasion will be severely hampered, and costly delays will ensue.
default  The law should specify:
defaultMuch progress has been made in Scotland through the 
defaultWildlife and Natural Environment Act 
default(
default2011
default)
default, which places Scotland at the forefront of EU action to tackle INNS, thanks to the pioneering provisions it contains.  We strongly support the precautionary approach adopted by the Scottish Government, which underpins a general no-release principle in relation to non-native species, irrespective of whether or not they are known to be invasive.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe also consider that use of existing legal provisions could be more extensive and urgently used.  For example we welcome the  ban on sale of invasive aquatic plants (under s14Z(a) of  the WCA 1981 but note that this is only for 5 species (the original consultation considered many more) and the ban has taken a significant length of time to introduce.
default  
defaultWe believe that the Scottish legislative arrangements of INNS are among the best in the EU and urge the adoption of equivalent measures in the other UK countries. We also commend the Scottish Government’s Code of Practice on INNS, approved by the Scottish Parliament, which accompanies the recent legislation. In particular, this specifies explicitly the roles and responsibilities of the relevant public bodies and agencies with regard to INNS. Uncertainty in this regard has been a widespread cause of delay and confusion in our responses to INNS, and is pre-requisite to establishing effective Rapid Response decision-making and action. One shortcoming in the Scottish legislation is the explicit exclusion from any regulation of non-native game birds (pheasants and red-legged partridges). These species are known in some instances, notably at very high density release sites, to cause damage to native wildlife
default, and a degree of regulatory control in problem areas is needed.
default&#xa0;
defaultCase studiesdefaultRuddy Duckdefault (
defaultOxyura
default 
defaultjamaicensis
default) – Ruddy ducks are native to North America and, like white-headed ducks (
defaultOxyura
default 
defaultleucocephala
default), are a member of the 
defaultstifftail
default family. They were brought to the UK in the 1930s and 1940s for captive wildfowl collections. Escapees first bred in the wild in 1952, and by 2000 the UK population numbered 6,000 birds. They would not have made it here, however, without the 
defaultaction
default of humans. International conservation organisations and European governments believe that hybridisation poses a very serious threat to the survival of the white-headed duck. The UK support
defaulted
default the largest population of wild-living ruddy ducks in Europe, and 
defaultso it was
default vital that action 
defaultwas, and continues to be,
default taken to remove the source of birds reaching the continent. 
defaultThe UK and Spain (which has an important population of the globally threatened white-headed duck) have been leading work on controlling ruddy ducks.  
defaultOther European countries with small feral populations of ruddy ducks, such as France
default and the Netherlands
default, must also play their part in addressing this t
defaulthreat to the white-headed duck.
defaultAsh diebackdefault (
defaultChalara
default 
defaultfraxinea
default) – 
defaultAsh die-back is a disease that has caused widespread damage to ash trees across Europe. The disease is caused by a fungus which
default 
defaultwas first recorded in Poland in the 1990s from where it has rapidly spread north and west across Europe. The disease was first reported in the UK in a plant nursery in February 2012, in a consignment of ash trees imported from the Netherlands. Subsequent checks revealed a number of other infections, mostly among nursery imports but also in a number of newly-planted sites. In October 2012 the Forestry Commission announced the first confirmed cases of the disease in mature ash trees not associated with any new planting
default.
default 
defaultUnfortunately, there is currently no known cure for this disease. Research in Europe has shown that some ash trees are more resistant to the disease than others, and that there is some degree of natural resistance. Work is now underway in the UK to identify those trees with the highest degrees of resistance to help generate replacement stock, should trees be lost.
default 
defaultOn 29 October 2012 
defaultthe UK Government also introduced new legislation to ban the import of ash plants, trees and seeds. The legislation also bans the movements of ash trees and seeds within the UK.
defaultAmerican minkdefault (
defaultNeovison
default 
defaultvison
default) – 
defaultThe American mink is a non-native species, introduced to the UK in 1929 from North America for fur farming. In the 1960s, there were 700 fur farms. Fur farming has been banned in the UK since the beginning of 2003.
default 
defaultDeliberate releases and escapes of farmed mink resulted in the establishment of feral populations in many parts of the UK, with consequent impacts on native wildlife, such as water voles and seabirds, particularly terns. The available scientific data confirms that mink predation has depleted populations of some bird species - at least at local level
default. 
defaultIt is unlikely that mink can be eradicated from the UK mainland without expensive and intensive effort. However, control may be appropriate on a local, targeted basis, where mink are having a negative impact
default on important bird populations. The 
defaultHebridean
default Mink Eradication programme demonstrates that significant progress to reduce the impacts of INNS can be made on a large scale, where there are sufficient levels of ambition and support. 
default&#xa0;
default13 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultMiller, C., 
defaultKettunen
default, M. &amp; Shine, C. 2006. Scope options for EU action on invasive alien
default 
defaultspecies (IAS) Final report for the European Commission. Institute for European Enviro
defaultnmental Policy (IEEP), Brussels.
default Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 2005.
default Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Biodiversity Synthesis. World Resources Institute, Washington, DC. 
defaulthttp://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.354.aspx.pdf
default 
default 
defaultThe Economic Cost of Invasive Non-native Species to the British Economy.
default&#xa0;
default CABI 2010.
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultEg
default 
defaultSage, R. B., 
defaultLudolf
default, C. &amp; Robertson, P. A. 2005. The ground flora of ancient semi-natural woodlands in pheasant release pens in England. 
defaultBiological Conservation 
default122default: 243-252.
default