&#xa0;
defaultWRITTEN EVIDENCE SUBMITTED TO THE EFRA COMMITTEE ON BEHALF OF THE GLOBAL FEDERATION OF ANIMAL SANCTUARIESdefault (GFAS)defaultJanuary 2014defaultT
defaulthe EFRA Committee is seeking written submissions of evidence in regard to 
defaultthe following:
defaultThe following is submitted on behalf of the Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries (GFAS).
defaultSUMMARYdefault&#xa0;
default1, defaultAbout GFASdefaultThe Global Federation of Animal Sanctuaries (GFAS) is an international non-profit organisati
defaulton dedicated to 
defaulthelping sanctuaries to help animals.
default 
defaultGFAS promotes and validates excellence in sanctuary management and humane and responsible care of animals through a global system of accreditation, collaboration and 
defaultmentoring. 
default GFAS promotes the develop
defaultment of greater recognition and r
defaultesources for sanctuaries, and works
default to 
defaulteliminate the causes of displaced animals.
defaultGFAS is proud to provide 
defaultcomprehensive
default standards on sanctuary excellence,
default and operates a 
defaultrigorous accreditation system 
defaultby which sanctuaries are assessed against these standards 
defaultthrough a written application, review of documents and site visit, 
defaultin order to achieve
default accreditation and verification. 
defaultThe GFAS Standards of Excellence were developed and reviewed with the input of
default animal 
defaultwelfare experts
default, non-profit professionals, sanctuary managers, 
defaultand veterinarians, utilis
defaulting existing standards from outstanding sanctuaries as a starting framework and refined/expanded upon based on knowledge and expertise of contributors.
defaultGFAS con
defaultsiders a 
defaultsanctuary 
defaultto be 
defaultan establishment that provides lifetime care for animals that have been abused, injured, abandoned, or are otherwise in need. The animals may come from sources 
defaultincluding, but not limited to, private owners, research laboratories, g
defaultovernment authorities, the entertainment industry, and zoos.
defaultAll GFAS 
defaultsanctuaries
default must adhere to certain policies as set out in our standards, including but not limited to:
defaultFacilities that are not genuine 
defaultsanctuaries, on the other hand, 
defaultmay 
defaultbuy and sell 
defaultprimates
default, ex
defaulthibit the animals on and off site, allow the public to 
defaulthave direct contact with primates
default, breed 
defaultprimates
default, and allow the public 
defaultto visit
default on a regular basis without escort. 
defaultIn addition, their 
defaultfacilities 
defaultmay be substandard. 
default2. defaultSituation in the UKdefaultGFAS has ac
defaultcredited and verified several primate sanctuaries in North America, where the issue of primates as pets is a particular problem in terms of numbers. 
defaultTo date, GFAS has accredited one primate sanctuary in the UK. We are aware of a handful of other primate-ke
defaulteping facilities across Europe that might also meet the standards for verification or accreditation by GFAS.
defaultIt is apparent that there is a dearth of suitable facilities for rehoming and rescuing primates. Allowing the ownership and trade of pet primates t
defaulto continue without this safety net would be irresponsible.
default 
defaultWe note that there is currently no definition of an animal sanctuary in UK legislation. We do not consider that this should be an obstacle to a ban on the keeping of primates as pets. Genuine sanc
defaulttuaries do not keep primates as pets, nor do they keep them specifically for exhibition. Furthermore they do not trade in primates.
default A ban on the keeping of pet primates or on the trade in primates would be unlikely to affect the activities of responsible a
defaultnimal sanctuaries, particularly if legislation is tailored towards 
defaultbanning 
defaultthe keeping of primates by individuals in a domestic environment.
default3. defaultConclusionsdefaultWe 
defaultare convinced 
defaultthat the keeping of primates in the UK should be restricted to licensed zoos and to genuine animal sanctuaries. We consider facilities 
defaultto be genuine sanctuaries if they 
defaultare already accredited or verified by GFAS, or are likely to comply with GFAS standards
default.
defaultAt this time, we do not offer comment on whether a ban on the keeping and/or a ban on the trade in primates as pets is the most suitable mechanism for achieving this restriction.
defaultIn the event of a ban, GFAS remains willing to assist Defra and other stake
defaultholders in advising on the best options for primates currently kept as pets.
defaultGFAS looks forward to working with and alongside other stakeholders in verifying and/or accrediting suitable facilities across Europe, where appropriate.
default&#xa0;
defaultPrepared for GFAS by Chrdefaultis Draper, GFAS Europe representativedefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default