&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence Submitted by Lisa Riley (PhD, MSc, MRes, MSc, BSc (Hons))default&#xa0;
defaultExecutive Summarydefault&#xa0;
defaultPersonal BackgrounddefaultI am a primatologist currently working as an independent consultant in an
defaultimal welfare and as a part-time lecturer in Higher Education Animal Management at Sparsholt College Hampshire (UK).
defaultPreviously (2011-2012) I held the position Senior Scientific Officer (Captive Wild Animals), Wildlife Department, RSPCA where I set up a reh
defaultoming project in association with Monkey World Ape Rescue Centre (Dorset, UK) to rehome the increasing number of UK pet primates rescued by the RSPCA.  
defaultI have worked as a Primate Keeper at Colchester Zoo (Essex, UK)
default, and as an independent consultant have 
defaultworked with zoos and sanctuaries in the UK and Europe advising on education, enrichment and campaigns relating to the keeping of primates. 
defaultThe opinions expressed in
default this submission are my
default own and should not be considered as the opinion of any establishmen
defaultt for/with which I have 
defaultworked. 
default&#xa0;
defaultEvidencedefaultThe exotic pet industry in the UK is a 
defaultgrowing
default industry that involves the trade and private keeping of a wide range of both wild-caught and captive
default-bred
default mammals, marsupials, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians and i
defaultnvertebrates. 
defaultThe UK
default pet 
defaultprimate 
defaultindustry is one facet of this
default wider exotics
default industry. 
defaultThe number and species of primates kept in the UK is unknown, partly due to a lack of regulation and partly due to a lack of enforcement of exi
defaultsting legislation
default. Common
defaultly kept sp
defaultecies (like common marmosets
default, pygmy marmosets and numerous tamarin species) are excluded from the Dangerous Wild Animals 
defaultAct 1976 (and associated (Modification) (No. 2) Order
default 2007
default)
default. This Act is ineffectively e
defaultnforced, with non-compliance reported
default to be 85-
default95%
default. Thus frequently kept species like capuchin monkeys
default,
default 
defaultthe keeping of which requires a licence,
default are often kept without a licence.  
default 
defaultWithout a national survey of pet keeping numbers will only ever be 
defaultestimates 
defaultand thus
default the proportion of pet primates being kept well and those who are neglected or abused
default remains unquantifiable
default. 
defaultHowever, i
defaultt is clear that
default the
default total number of pet primates
default in the UK
default requiring rescue and rehoming has increased. The 
defaultamount of resource (money, h
defaultours of work, projects ini
defaulttiated and research undertaken)
default animal welfare charities
default and professionals are 
defaultinves
defaultt
defaulting
default into rehoming pet primates and prosecuting unknowledgeable
default, neglectful
default owners is escalating. 
defaultI believe that this increase is due
default in part
default to 
defaultinternet trade. 
defaultEvidence of both
default private sales (through classified sites) and 
defaultcommercial sales from specialist online pet shops is abundant. Simply Google search “marmoset for sale”
default. These sales raise concern about current legislation
default. The Pet Animals Act 
default1951 refer
defaults to a 
defaultpet shop premises 
defaultand when I have 
defaultdealt
default with local authorities in the past some have express
defaulted confusion as to whether
default online pet shops require a licence because they do not sell from a physical premises. Private sales are of course exempt
default from licensing currently. 
defaultInternet trade not only increases the accessibility of owning a pet primate, making such ownership easily attainable for many, but it fuels the spread of erroneous information and poor practice. 
defaultThe industry is currently 
defaultpeppered with owners who do not understand the complex needs of their pet primate
default(s)
default. Primates require complex physical and social environments, specialist veterinary care and 
defaultmany
default,
default like marmosets
default,
default have specific dietary requirements (both in terms of the t
defaultype of food and the presentation). They are susceptible 
defaultto physical and psychological abnormality and have the cognitive capacity to suffer profoundly when their needs are not met. 
defaultConcerning
default the rescues in which I have been involved even basic requirement
defaults are not understood by owners. For example, owners have failed to provide vit
defaultamin D3 supplement. C
defaultonsequently 
defaulttheir pet primate has 
defaultdeveloped metabolic bone disease
default leading to permanent bone deformity
default. Owners also misunderstand 
defaultthe need for company, even 
defaultthose who reference the 
defaultDEFRA Code of Practice fo
defaultr the Welfare of Privately Kept
default 
defaultNon-Human 
defaultPrimates. Primates must have company of their own kind, humans and traditional companion a
defaultnimals like dogs and cats are no
default substitute. 
defaultMost primates are sold individually on the internet, are advertised as “easy to look after” and are intended to be kept individually. 
defaultI believe that internet trade in primates, both commercial and private should be banned. 
defaultA seller has a duty of care to t
defaulthe primate they are selling (according to the Animal Welfare Act 2006) and a prospective owner should be given care information specific to that primate, including medical history. Internet trade does not support this and any 
defaultattempt to regulate
default would be e
defaultxtremely difficult to enforce. 
defaultI further believe that the practice of keeping primates as pets should be banned
default,
default that only specialist keepers should keep a primate for welfare or conservation reasons (e.g. in a sanctuary)
default. 
defaultA primate’s needs cannot be met 
defaultin a domestic situation. Zoo and laboratory housed primates have extensive legislation protecting the
defaultir welfare. The only reason why zoo and laboratory
default legislation is effective is that the location of the primates is known to 
defaultthe inspectorate. This cannot 
defaultbe achie
defaultved regarding pet keeping, t
defaulthe DWA demonstrates this clearly. 
defaultIt would be a huge benefit if the Government would define pet ownership
default (keeping as a companion in a domestic situation)
default and specialist keeping (keeping by academically trained and tech
defaultnically experienced individuals
default in specialist facilities
default)
default so that the two can be differentiated
default. T
defaulthe keeping of primates as pets
default should be banned, while s
defaultpecialist keepers should 
defaultbe
default subject to rigorous licensing conditions. 
default 
defaultThe burden of licensing should 
defaultnot fall to the local authority
default which is under-
defaultresourced and unable to effectively enforce existing animal related 
defaultlegislation,
default but should be centrally administered by the Government. The cost of licensing should be 
defaultfunded by sp
defaultecialist keepers
default. The standa
defaultrd of licensing conditions should equal 
defaultthose of the Zoo Licensing Act 1981. 
default 
defaultThe
default prohibition of 
defaultpet 
defaultprimate 
defaultkeeping
default, internet trade in primates and the
default licensing of specialist keeping
default should be achieved using secondary legislation created under the Anima
defaultl Welfare Act 2006. I believe the Act is sufficient
defaultly broad and that prohibition of internet trade and pet primate keeping is
default proportionate given the level of suffering primates can 
defaultexperience 
defaultwhen their 
defaultneeds are not met, while licensing of specialist kee
defaultping permits rescue and rehoming as a ban in pet keeping is phased in and would provide life-long sanctuary to ex-pet primates.  
default 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default