&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten Evidence Submitted defaultby defaultPeacePlayers International – Middle EastdefaultI wish to submit this submission of evidence on behalf of PeacePlayers International – Middle East, an organization that uses basketball as a medium for bridging divides between Palestinian and 
defaultIsraeli youth. 
default1. defaultExecutive Summarydefault2. Organizational BackgrounddefaultEstablished in 200
default1, PeacePlayers International (PPI) is non-profit organization that uses the game of basketball to unite, educate and inspire young people in divided communities, based on the premise that children who play together can learn to live together. Since its la
defaultunch in 2001, PeacePlayers International has worked with over 
default60
default,000 children and trained more than 
default6
default00 youth leaders in Israel, Northern Ireland, South Africa, and Cyprus. In all of its bases, PPI uses the language and unique dynamic of basketball to brea
defaultk down seemingly insurmountable barriers. 
defaultIn 2005, PeacePlayers International – Middle East (PPI – ME) initiated multi-faceted, year-round programs for Palestinian and Israeli youth. PPI’s core program, the PeacePlayers Basketball Clubs (PPBC), seeks to p
defaultromote peaceful coexistence by bringing Palestinian and Israeli youth together through joint peacebuilding and athletic activities. PPI’s innovative peacebuilding curriculum, designed and implemented in partnership with the 
defaultglobal consultancy the 
defaultArbinger 
defaultInstitute, integrates tested conflict transformation techniques into basketball activities. The curriculum provides our participants with an opportunity to build friendships with children from the “other” side, develop practical skills to deal with conflic
defaultt in their everyday lives and grow into ambassadors for peace in their communities. By offering structured, equitable athletic and educational programming, PPI – ME challenges the status quo of hatred and fear that grip Palestinian and Israeli societies, m
defaultaking cross-community cooperation logical and normal. 
defaultPast external and internal evaluations, conducted by Bar Ilan University (Israel), have consistently demonstrated significant attitude change among youth following participation in the program (see the
default 
defaultEvaluation section
default for more details on program evaluation and impact). In November
default,
default 2012
default,
default PPI – ME launched a three-year randomized control study in conjunction 
defaultconducted in cooperation with 
defaultNew York University. PPI – ME 
defaultsuccessfully implemented 
defaultthe first
default year pilot of the study 
defaultand is current running year two of the study
default. 
defaultAccomplishments include:
default&#xa0;
default3. Problem AnalysisdefaultThe Palestinian-Israeli stalemate of recent years is not sustainable. The population growth rate of Israeli settlers in the West Bank is 2.5 the growth rate of the citizen population within Israel,
default hampering the possibility of implementation of the two-state solution. Moreover, controversial legislation on the Israeli side has been accompanied with an increase in racist sentiments 
defaultand actions 
defaultaimed at Palestinians. On the Palestinian side, sanctions
default imposed against "normalization" activities involving Israelis hamper the g
defaultrowth of pro-peace initiatives. 
defaultTo date, U.S.-led peace talks have yielded little fruit, and populations on both sides are skeptical regarding the possibilities for peace. This is 
defaultsupported by the fact that r
defaultecent approaches to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict emphasize that a negotiated solution will require a transformation of the attitudes of both communities in the direction of reconciliation, mutual trust, and cooperation: a "b
defaultottom-up" approach, in which a change in public opinion precipitates a shift in policy.
default 
defaultIsraeli and Palestinian
default societies are separated by walls physical and social; language, religion and culture have created a “tight, almost impermeable ethnic boundary
default”
default between the two communities. Individuals are left to learn about the “other” primarily through the media, myths, and stereotypes, allowing prejudice and fear to thrive. These misconceptions serve to justify further segregation, in turn begetting only mo
defaultre ignorance. 
defaultEquitable, structured contact in pursuit of shared goals has been shown to powerfully reduce such prejudices
default, and tea
defaultm sports – such as basketball, PeacePlayers
default 
defaultInternational – Middle East
default program’s primary tool for integration – serve as an
default ideal tool to facilitate such encounters, aided by clear, impartial rules and easily identifiable team goals.
defaultEquitable, structured contact in pursuit of shared goals has been shown to powerfully reduce such prejudices
default, and team sports – such as basketba
defaultll, 
defaultPPI – ME's
default primary tool for integration – serve as an ideal tool to facilitate such encounters, aided by clear, impartial rules and easily identifiable team goals. 
defaultPalestinian and Israeli
default children may attend different schools, live in segregated 
defaulttowns 
defaultand 
defaultneighborhoods and speak different languages, but they all play sports according to the same rules. 
defaultSport also enjoys almost universal appeal, attracting individuals independently of their politics, socioeconomic status and ethnicity. 
defaultBy bringing the tw
defaulto sides together for regular integrated practices and games, PPI – ME provides a neutral forum for the establishment of deep personal bonds and lasting friendships. This sustained contact successfully challenges youths' negative preconceptions of the “othe
defaultr,” allowing them to explore different cultures in a positive setting.
defaultA critique of many past coexistence programs has been that they offered either intensive, but short-term interventions
default, or programming that was long-term in nature but offered limited,
default irregular contact
default. Moreover, few facilitators of such programs had received any formal training in conflict resolution, and thus were deemed ineffectual as facilitators.
default In addition, one study has claimed that although stereotypes develop during early c
defaulthildhood, most inter-group cooperation activities did not engage participants in this age group. From these observations, we may conclude that necessary conditions for effective coexistence activities would include regular, long-term programming, would be 
defaultled by trained conflict resolution facilitators and would engage participants starting at a very young age. PPI – ME has adopted each of these conditions in developing 
defaultits programming, and in 2012, augmented the effectiveness of programming by adding two l
defaultocal curriculum facilitators who have received intensive training to be certified to deliver Arbinger conflict resolution workshops to a variety of audiences.
default&#xa0;
default4. ActivitiesdefaultPPI – ME runs frequent, year-round programming, which includes the following:
defaultPeacePlayers Basketball Clubsdefault – A network of youth basketball clubs in which 
defaultPalestinians and Israelis
default children come together for integrated practices led the guidance of a diverse group of coaches.
defaultJerusalem All-Stars: defaultThree fully integrated PPI – ME team
defaults compete in the Israel Basketball Association’s elite youth league, in cooperation with top women's basketball club ASA Jerusalem. Teams are comprised of 
defaultIsraeli and Palestinian
default girls from East and West Jerusalem, marking the first time a joint 
defaultPalestinia
defaultn-Israeli
default team from Jerusalem has joined the league.
defaultPeace Education Retreats: defaultPalestinian and Israeli
default participants embark on one three-day retreat per year, at which they take part in intensive peace education workshops.
defaultLeadership Development Program: defaultEx
defaultceptional teen leaders engage in weekly practices, volunteer as assistant coaches with younger participants, lead social action projects and embark on an annual three-day Leadership Development Retreat.
defaultCoaches for Conflict Resolution:default defaultPPI – ME's newest pr
defaultogram, launched in 2013, Coaches for Conflict Resolution is
default a two-year bilingual (Arabic and Hebrew) training program, designed and implemented by PPI – ME in cooperation with Zinman College at the Wingate Institute and the Arbinger Institute. The course f
defaulteatures professional coaching certification training (legally required for coaching in Israel and East Jerusalem); quarterly intensive conflict resolution workshops (including an annual weekend retreat); foreign language instruction (Arabic for Israelis, H
defaultebrew for Palestinians) to enhance symmetry, instill an appreciation for the "other's" culture, and to improve participants' ability to communicate with one another;  and a year-long hands-on supervised practicum, in which coaches-in-training help facilita
defaultte joint activities for PPBC participants.
default&#xa0;
default5. EvaluationsdefaultIndependent evaluators conduct impact evaluations on PPI 
default–
default ME's programs on an annual basis. From 2005 
default–
default 2011, evaluations were conducted by a group of researchers from Bar-Ilan University. Data demonstrated the both 
defaultPalestinian and Israeli
default participants had fewer stereotypes and ethnocentric attitudes and were more willing to engage in social contact with th
defaulte "other" side following participation in the program. These positive attitudes became stronger with long-term participation over the course of four years. 
defaultIn the 2012-2013 program year, PPI 
default–
default ME 
defaultlanched
default a long-term randomized control trial (RCT) conducte
defaultd by two professional evaluators, 
defaultin cooperation with
default New York Universit
defaulty
default. The s
defaulttudy will take place over three 
defaultyears, and will employ sophisticated behavioral and attitudinal measures to study the effects of PPI’s programs on adolescents living in conflic
defaultt, examining intergroup and intra-group perceptions, political identity formation, and communities’ capacities for conflict management. 
defaultIn 2013, the pilot year of the study was completed successfully, and conclusion
defaults
default from the pilot study were used to refin
defaulte the methodology. The second year of the study has recently been launched.
default Funding has been achieved for an additional two years of research, and the organization and the university are currently seeking funding in order to extend the study further.
default Littl
defaulte quantitative research exists in the field of grassroots peace-building interventions, and the results of the study will represent a much needed addition to the understanding of conflict resolution.
default&#xa0;
default6. ConclusiondefaultWe thank the House of Commons for this op
defaultportunity to present evidence regarding the unique circumstances of the Israeli Palestinian conflict, and for the need for increased civil society actions that will build trust among individuals on both sides. Popular support for a formal peace agreement w
defaultill give leaders the power to make what seems now to be a distant, unlikely possibility into a viable endeavor.
default&#xa0;
defaultRegards,
defaultKaren Doubilet
defaultManaging Director, PeacePlayers International – Middle East
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultMuzafer Sherif, Superordin
defaultate Goals in the Reduction of Intergroup Conflict 63 American Journal of Sociology 349, 355 (1958).
default 
defaulthttp://www.btselem.org/settlements/statistics
default              
default Maoz, Ifat. "An Experiment in Peace: Reconciliation-Aimed Workshops of Jewish-Israeli and Palestinian Youth." Journal of Peace Research 37, no. 6
default (2000): 721-736.
default Romann &amp; Weingrod. 1993. Living Together Separately: Palestinians and Israelis in Contemporary Jerusalem by 
defaultInternational Journal of Middle East Studies
default, Vol. 25, No. 1 (Feb., 1993), pp. 148-14
default Pettigrew, Thomas and Linda R. Tropp. “A
default Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2006. Vol. 90. No. 5. Pgs. 751-763
default Pettigrew, Thomas and Linda R. Tropp. “A Meta-Analytic Test of Intergroup Contact Theory.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 2006. Vol. 90. No. 5. Pgs. 751-763
default P. Lemish, "Cultural conflict and the curriculum," paper presented at the annual 
defaultmeeting of the American Research Association, San Francisco, 1989.
default Cornell, Jennifer C. “Prejudice Reduction Through Intergroup Contact in Northern Ireland: A Social-Psychological Critique.” Conflict Quarterly, Winter 1994.
default P. Lemish, "Cultural conflic
defaultt and the curriculum," paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Research Association, San Francisco, 1989.
default&#xa0;
default