&#xa0;
defaultSubmission by defaultOneKinddefault14 January 2014default&#xa0;defaultIntroductiondefault1. OneKind, formerly Advocates for Animals, is an animal protection charity based in Edinburgh with supporters around the United 
defaultKingdom. We campaign for improved understanding and treatment of all sentient individual animals, including farmed animals, companion animals and wild animals, in the UK, Europe and beyond. Our Pet Origins campaign aims to educate the public to enquire mor
defaulte closely into the provenance of their pets, with a view to reducing the markets for irresponsible commercial breeding and for undomesticated "exotic" pets, including non-human primates.
default2. We have recently become aware of the EFRA Committee call for subm
defaultissions on the subject of the keeping of primates as pets, and we would be grateful for the opportunity to submit brief comments on some if the matters under consideration. 
default&#xa0;
defaultExtent of tradedefault3. We note that the Committee is considering the extent of the t
defaultrade and keeping of primates as pets within the UK as a whole, and we believe this is the correct approach. The enormous internet trade in pets of all kinds means that the UK has become a single market for animals, along the same lines as inanimate commodi
defaultties. Animals, including primates, can be ordered from internet classified advertising sites and, in theory at least, delivered within a day or two to distant locations without any monitoring, regulation or specific welfare provision. The Pet Animals Act 1
default951 dates from before the birth of the internet or, indeed, its inventor, and cannot regulate this trade. Strictly speaking, vendors and purchasers in England should observe the DEFRA Code of Recommendations for the Welfare of Privately Kept Primates, or i
defaultn Northern Ireland the equivalent Code made under the Welfare of Anima
defaultls Act (Northern Ireland) 2011,
default but primate Codes have not been introduced in Scotland or Wales.
default4. It appears that private primate-keeping is at a low level in Scotland - the former Sc
defaultottish Executive estimated it to be less than 100 when it consulted on a potential welfare code.
default&#xa0;
default OneKind would estimate the figure to be higher than this, based on our own knowledge of cases. We commented last year on the case of a marmoset being advertis
defaulted for sale by a notice in the window of a beauty 
defaultsupplies shop in Kilmarnock, East Ayrshire. The 5-year-old monkey was one of six being kept in the shop owner's home, and was advertised for possible breeding, at a price of £1,000.
default&#xa0;
default In the absence of a lic
defaultensing 
defaultrequirement for marmosets,
default it is impossible to know how many of these animals are kept.
default5. It is also difficult to measure the size of the trade on the basis of internet advertising, as this sector appears to be particularly vulnerable to "scamming
default", a fact that is regularly referred to in advertisements. This may be connected with the high cost of primates, from several hundred to several thousand pounds each.
default&#xa0;
defaultShould primates be kept as pets at all?default6. OneKind does not believe that primates can e
defaultver thrive in cages in people’s homes. They are highly intelligent, fully aware of their surroundings and situations and are capable of feeling emotions similar to our own. At the same time they are essentially undomesticated, and designed for their own so
defaultcial groupings and natural habitats. 
default7. OneKind agrees fully with the statement in the DEFRA Code of Recommendations that:
default"Primates should not be considered as pets in the accepted sense of the word: they are not species that can be treated as members o
defaultf the family in the way that a cat or dog might be. They are wild undomesticated animals that cannot be house-trained or fully tamed."
default8.
default It is of great concern, therefore, that internet classified advertisements can regularly be seen describing monkeys a
defaults "babies" and conjuring images of quasi-human infants that wear nappies and are bottle fed.
default&#xa0;
default Paradoxically, the owners are sometimes prepared to sell the "babies" at a young age, long before they would naturally separate from their parents in the wild. 
default9. There is a growing body of evidence that at least some primates have thoughts, feelings and understanding similar in important ways to those of humans. This degree of self-awareness may in fact increase the individual's capacity for suffering as a conse
defaultquence of stresses such as early separation or being kept in an inappropriate environment. Thus the welfare of the individual depends on much more than the appropriate diet, shelter and veterinary attention. The capacity for mental suffering as a result of
default inappropriate keeping is significant. OneKind is concerned that even 
defaultwith greater regulation; private owners cannot be guaranteed to meet the complex needs of these animals.
default10. Failing to acquire sufficient specialist knowledge of primate behaviour befo
defaultre acquiring an animal has been identified in the two existing Codes as failing to take a step that would be reasonable, if not essential, to ensure that the needs of the animals are met. This would constitute a failure of the responsibility to ensure welf
defaultare under the Animal Welfare Act 2006 or the Welfare of Anima
defaultls Act (Northern Ireland) 2011.
default Nonetheless, it is possible to buy a primate without demonstrating the possession of any such knowledge. On 8 January 2014 we accessed an advertisement that requir
defaulted the purchaser of a 6-month-old marmoset to be experienced or "be willing to learn", which is meaningless in welfare terms. 
default11. Being long-lived makes primates particularly vulnerable to changing circumstances, such as the arrival of children in the ow
defaultner's family, changes of job and house moves. One advertisement seen last week, offering a 6-month-old female marmoset for sale for £1,200, included the comment "Gutted but have to sell as moving house."
default12. For all of these reasons, therefore, OneKind ag
defaultrees with the view expressed by the RSPCA and Wild Futures in their joint 2012 briefing "Primates as pets. Is there a case for regulation?", that:
default"The distinctive status of primates surely requires that only registered, specialised keepers who can ensure 
defaulthigh welfare standards and who keep these unique animals for a purpose beyond merely interest or companionship, namely species conservation or rescue from injury, abandonment or neglect, should be allowed to keep them."
default&#xa0;
defaultImplementing a ban on private primadefaultte-keepingdefault13. In terms of mechanism, OneKind supports the recommendation of Eurogroup for Animals that EU Member States should adopt the positive list approach for the permitted keeping of pets. Rather than proscribing specific species or breeds, which e
defaultxperience (e.g. the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991) has shown to be highly problematic, government should create a limited list of those animals which are suitable for private keeping, and prohibit the keeping of any other type. This approach has now been adopted
default in both Belgium and the Netherlands. In Belgium, it is reported that enforcement has been simplified as a result of this approach.
default14. A suggested objective measure of suitability can be found in the EMODE tool recently described by Warwick et al in thei
defaultr paper Assigning Degrees of Ease or Difficulty for Pet Animal Maintenance
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://emergentdisease.org/assets/documents/emode-brochure-screen.pdf
default.
default&#xa0;
default EMODE is a system to "
defaultscore" animals and "assign them to categories indicating the ease or difficulty with which they can be kept in accordance with welfare and public health and safety considerations.
default15. The authors explain that primates require "extreme degrees of complex m
defaultaintenance in enclosed environments, and availability and quality of guidance is limited.
default&#xa0;
default There are significant zoonotic risks and often human safety risks that require very careful management, and availability and quality of guidance on injury and diseas
defaulte prevent
defaultion and control is very limited”.
default Accordingly, their range in this summary 
defaultexcludes 'easy' and 'moderate'.
default16. It is acknowledged that there are practical difficulties in "phasing out" an established population, the extent and location of which a
defaultre not known, and whose welfare must be protected. Again, the longevity of the animals is a factor to consider, and the fact that any residual population after a ban might require care for many years. One approach might be to register all animals in privat
defaulte keeping at the time of the ban, and allow them to live out their lives with their current owners. However, this would not improve unsuitable conditions; and once animals can no longer be used for breeding, their commercial value reduces and the risk of n
defaulteglect increases.
default17. Nonetheless an increasing number of countries (Bulgaria, Sweden, the Netherlands, Israel, Mexico, Honduras, Brazil and India) as well as over 20 states in the US have succeeded in introducing a ban on the private keeping of pet prima
defaultte
defaults
default. In the Netherlands, the expected rise in rescue animals has been prepared for by animal welfare organisations such as Stichting AAP, which has opened a new primate hall and quarantine facility. The UK is fortunate in having expert advice available fro
defaultm organisations such as Wild Futures and the RSPCA, and we feel sure that the challenges, and the understandable concerns for the welfare of animals currently in private keeping, can successfully be overcome. 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default