&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Scottish Grocers’ Federation [TOB
default17
default]
default&#xa0;defaultIntroductiondefaultThe Scottish Grocers’ Federation (SGF)
default 
defaultwelcomes the opportunity to respond to this important 
defaultinquiry into tobacco smuggling. SGF is the national trade association for the Convenience Store sector in Scotland. The sector in Scotland provides upwards of 40,000 jobs across
default more tha
defaultn 5,000 Convenience Stores – there are more 
defaultConvenience
default Stores in Scotland per head of population than in the rest of the UK
default.
defaultWe work closely with our partner organisation in England, the Association of Convenience Stores (ACS). Several of the key points made in our submission will affirm key points from ACS’s own submission to the Committee. We will also include information specific to Scotland, which we hope the committee will find useful.
defaultTobacco represents an important category for 
defaultthe convenience market, and we advocate
default the responsible s
defaultale of tobacco products through 
defaultvigorous age verification poli
defaultcies within our members’ stores. 
defaultAll of our members accept that tobacco must be controlled and regulated but this can only be done if tobacco products are made by legitimate manufacturers and sold by responsible retailers.
defaultIllicit
default sales of tobacco products create significant burdens to both convenience store retailers and the 
defaultGovernment. 
defaultThe availability of cheap, illicit tobacco within communities harms legitimate retailers who sell products legally and in a responsible manner
default through implementing age restriction policies within their stores
default. Businesses not only 
defaultlose
default direct sales of tobacco to illicit traders, but also 
defaultsuffer a drop in footfall (and therefore an overall drop in sales) from
default customers who stop coming into their shop
default.
defaultAs the Committee will be aware
default,
default the UK Government has indicated that it will not proceed with any measures to introduce standardised packaging of tobacco products until evidence of the impact of this policy from 
defaultAustralia
default can be gathered and analysed. Additionally, the Environment and Public Health Committee of the European Parliament recently voted against adopting 
defaultmeasures
default on standardised packaging in the revision of the European Tobacco Products Directive. However, the Scottish Government has indicated that it intends 
defaultto press ahead with its own plans to int
defaultroduce standardised packaging. W
defaulte have a strong concern that this will simply be a boost to the illegal trade.
default Evidence from empty pack surveys suggests that currently about 13% of tobacco products used in Scotland are illicit in one form or another. It is vital that this problem is not exacerbated through ineffective policies such as standardised packaging. Additionally such a measure is likely to create a problem of cross border smuggling within the UK. A wider issue the Committee may wish to consider is whether or not the Scottish Government has the power to legislate for these measures.
defaultAs operational targets for tobacco seizure have been missed in 2012-13, priority should instead be given to growing activity and regul
defaultation against the illicit trade to avoid undermining the progress already made by the Government and legitimate retailers to lower the number 
defaultof smokers and to ensure that underage children cannot
default access these products
default.
default Illicit traders target those living in lower-income areas, particularly children, who are not only attracted by the lower price of illicit products, but also by the
default ease of access to them, owing to a
default lack of age restriction enforced by this market. 
default  
defaultWhy Border Force failed to meet its operational targets for tobacco seizure in 2012–13defaultAlthough HMRC has made significant progress in tackling the illicit trade at UK borders, the lack of focus on the growth of
default volume crime
default on the ground in communities has meant that inland illicit activity has been able to thrive 
defaultin our most vulnerable communities, and has contributed to the failure of HMRC t
defaulto reach its operational targets in 2012-13. 
default 
defaultThis is evident from HMRC’s own statistics on prosecutions. 
defaultThe proportion of prosecutions for inland seizures compared with those on the border and overseas is extremely low, and targets have also been missed in this area. 
default For instance, o
defaultnly 5% of cigarettes seized in 2010-2011 and 14% of Hand Rolling Tobacco were seized inland
default.
defaultGovernment-led responsibility for ta
defaultckling smuggling lies with HMRC; however
default local agencies have the network and the people to identify illegal tobacco sales in the community
default, particularly in the case of low-level volume crime
default. There are currently limite
defaultd links between these agencies, and
default there is a pressing need for a more 
defaultco-ordinated
default approach between local and national enforcement. Clear responsibilities should be outlined for Trading Standards and local police in this area; they should not serve as merely a supporting partner of HMRC. 
defaultWhether the current sanctions and penalties for tobacco smuggling are appropriatedefaultThe Committee may find it useful to know that since 2011 anyone who wishes to sell tobacco in Scotland must be registered on the Scottish Government’s Tobacco Retail Register – the scheme currently has approximately 11,000 registered sellers. SGF’s members have on the whole been very positive about the register – they are willing to be seen as responsible and legitimate retailers. A key factor in the high levels of registration is that there is no charge attached to registering and it can be done through a fairly simple on-line proce
defaultss.
defaultThere are serious consequences for retailers who are not in compliance with the new smoking legislation. The Tobacco and Primary Medical Services (Scotland) Act 2010 gives powers to Trading Standard Officers to issue fixed penalty notices for offences, including selling tobacco to under 18s and not being on the Retailer Register. If a retailer is found to be in breach of tobacco sales legislation three times within a two year period, a Local Authority can apply to the courts to have the retai
defaultler banned from selling tobacco.
defaultFor the first time under tobacco sales laws, those found to be selling tobacco illicitly by not being on the Register can be fined up to £20,000 and sent to prison for six months. Scotland is the only nation of the UK to have such a scheme in place. The registration scheme gives a wider range of tools to Trading Standards which will help them in enforcing age restriction laws. However, we have a concern that offences against the scheme are not being prosecuted with sufficient force
default possibly due to a lack of resources on the ground as public spending continues to be cut back.
default 
defaultOur understanding is that in 2011-2012 there were no prosecution for offences relating to the Register.
defaultAs with our colleagues from 
defaultACS
default, we believe
default that current sanctions against tobacco smugglers, particularly those who operate on the ground within communities, are not strong enough and do not target the correct people. Current activities, such as the use of UK Duty ‘fiscal mark’ detector and banning orders do not target illicit traders who trade in locations 
defaultsuch as vans and tab houses, but instead 
defaultimpose further regulatory burdens on legitimate retailers.
defaultIn addition to 
defaultaddition
defaultal resources for Trading Standards and local police to be able to bring action against illicit tobacco traders, new and harsher penalties to deter these sellers should also be introduced. 
defaultT
defaulthe current structure of sanctions is counter-pro
defaultductive and needs to be tackled.
default 
defaultCurrent
default sanctions
default are also 
defaulttoo complicated and time-consuming for HMRC to pursue. 
defaultA suite of new and easy to administer penalties targeted at sellers of smuggled tobacc
defaulto products should be introduced, including:
default&#xa0;
defaultWe hope the Committee will find this submission helpful. We would be very willing to engage further with the Committee in whichever way is most useful.
defaultJohn Lee
default, 
defaultPublic Affairs Advisor
defaultScottish Grocers’ Federation
default 
default28
defaultth
default August 2013.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1
default&#xa0;
default HMRC Tackling Tobacco Smuggling
default