&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from 
defaultPetrol Retailers Association
default [TOB
default18
default]
default&#xa0;default1. 
defaultIntroduction
default:
default1.1 
defaultThe Petrol Retailers Association (PRA), part of the Retail Motor Industry 
defaultFederation
default (RMI), represents 5,500 independent fuel retailers across the UK
default, many of whom are small rural filling stations. 
defaultThe retail sector makes a key contribution to the British economy, supporting jobs in communities across the United Kingdom. Forecourt retailing is one of the UK’s most regulated industries and tough economic times, alongside wave after wave of new 
defaultregulation, are making such businesses financially stressed.
default  Another 175 forecourts have closed across the UK in the last year alone and 6,000 have closed since 1998.
default&#xa0;
default1.2 The PRA welcomes any request to give oral evidence to the Home Office Select Committee 
defaultrelating to
default this submission.
default&#xa0;
default2. 
defaultDeclaration of 
defaultI
defaultnterests:
default2.1 
defaultThe PRA supports openness and transparency and are t
defaultherefore willing to disclose that we have some tobacco manufacturers/suppliers amongst our wide range of associates and retail members.
default The views within this response are widely shared by our members and as such the PRA would hope that the Government give this submission equal treatment as with all other legal, legitimate and law abiding participants
default&#xa0;
default3. 
defaultOur 
defaultC
defaultoncerns:
default3.1
default 
defaultTobacco is a legal product and is a vital part of the independent forecourt shop sales, contributing between 30 to 50% share of overall revenue – 79% of our retailers think that tobacco is directly important to their bottom line.
default 
default3.2 
defaultThe forecourt sector is already hit hard by the illicit trade in terms of both fuel and tobacco. The illicit trade of tobacco undermines the responsible retailer business and is wholly detrimental to those working within the confines of the law.  Not only do retailers suffer financial loss at the hands of illegal traders, the Treasury cannot afford to compromise tax 
defaultrevenues at
default a time when the economy can ill afford any further costs or losses of revenue. 
default3.3 
defaultThe high profits and low risk involved in smuggling and counterfeiting tobacco allows criminals to make considerable returns by undercutting legitimate retail sales with products that have been known to contain asbestos, dead flies and faeces. Therefore, illicit tobacco undermines small retailers such as our members by depriving them of key earnings whilst having a detrimental effect on general footfall as consumers do not enter their shops to buy other groceries. The social cost of the illicit trade is also extensive, with revenue from the sale of illicit tobacco directly funding all manner of criminal activity that could overflow into the local community, where our members’ businesses are located. 
default3.4 
defaultA report from KPMG
default in April 2013 showed the UK has the fastest growing problem with illicit tobacco in the entire EU – with contraband and counterfeit production increasing by 6.4% in the last year. The same report shows that the illicit trade in the UK is the fo
defaultu
defaultrth highest in the EU, behind only Lithuania, 
defaultRepublic of 
defaultIreland and Finland. Unregulated products are being manufactured for the sole purpose of being smuggled to the UK where they are sold on the streets, in markets and by gangs at pocket money prices.
default3.5 
defaultIn a poll
default at the end of last year nearly two-thirds of our members stated that illicit tobacco is having an impact on their business with 34% being aware of illicit products being sold in their area and nearly
default 
defaulthalf believing it is easy to buy them. In addition to this 64% of retailers believe the illicit tobacco trade has a detrimental impact on their business. 
default3.6 
defaultCertain initiatives for discouraging smoking proposed in the UK, Europe and around the world may in fact be fuelling the ‘black market’
default, having
default the opposite effect than that intended. In the early 1990s this was seen in Canada when attempts at controlling tobacco use resulted in a surge in illicit tobacco that ultimately culminated in a reverse in Government policy and the rescinding of a string of policy proposals. As such we remain concerned about the impact of excessive regulations on the UK’s already significant (and growing) illicit trade problem. For example:
default&#xa0;
default4. Conclusion:
default4.1
default In summary the PRA is concerned that proposed government measures, at both a UK and European level, could increase the illicit tobacco trade and accelerate the already worrying trend of independent petrol forecourt closures. 
defaultWhilst we welcome government plans to stall the proposed implementation of standardised packaging for tobacco in England we are worried that the scheme could adversely impact our members in
default Northern
default Ireland and Scotland
default, who could see both retail
default sales and general footfall decrease as a result. 
defaultIt is clear that government need to gain better control of the illicit tobacco trade, but the PRA urge them to turn attention to 
defaultdisrupting illegal supply chains and 
defaultincreasing the amount of arrests, prosecutions and convictions as opposed to penalising the tobacco 
defaultretailer 
defaultindustry as a whole.   
default&#xa0;
defaultPetrol Retailers Association
defaultAugust 2013
default&#xa0;
default Populus (November 2012) Philip Morris International, Poll of UK Petrol Retail Association Members
default 
defaultK
defaultPMG, (2013), Project Star 2012 Results 
defaulthttp://www.pmi.com/eng/media_center/media_kit/documents/project_star_2012_final_report.pdf
default 
defaultPopulus (November 2012) Philip Morris International, Poll of UK Petrol Retail Association Members
default