&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault Dr. Andrew Blick, Lecturer, Institute of Contemporary British History, King’s College Londondefault (FTF 06)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default1. The Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2011 was a major constitutional innovation, and though it had merit it was – as this Committee has already noted - introduced without sufficient opportunity for parliamenta
defaultry scrutiny or wider public consultation. It is therefore appropriate to substitute this lack of prior consideration with subsequent assessment, of the sort this Committee is carrying out.
default&#xa0;default2. There will certainly be many important 
defaultconstitutional 
defaultdimension
defaults to the impact of the Act. This evidence submission is concerned with two in particular: the role of the Ci
defaultvil Service and the context of c
defaultoalition government. It considers these issues in particular through assessment of the 
defaultCabinet Manual 
defaultand 
defaultMinisteria
defaultl Code
default,
default and mechanisms 
defaultthat these documents 
defaultdescribe.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Civil Service and pre-election talks
default3. 
defaultThe present rules governing contact between civil servants 
defaultand opposition parties in advance of a General Election are set out in the present edition of the 
defaultCabinet Manual
default (paragraph 2.21)
default. 
defaultThough this text appeared in final form 
defaultafter the advent of the first coalition government
default 
defaultsince 1945, and following the passing of the 
defaultFixed-term Parliaments Act 2011
default, 
defaultcertain
default changes to the existing rules
default, taking into 
defaultaccount the
defaultse
default 
defaulttwin developments, are necessary. They should be announced as soon as possible, and then eventually be included 
defaultin a revised text of the manual.
default&#xa0;
default4. 
defaultA first set of issues 
defaultinvolves the timing of these talks a
defaultnd the means by which they come 
defaultabo
defaultut
default. The manual states:
default&#xa0;
defaultAt an appropriate time towards the end of any Parliament, as the next general election approaches, the Prime Minister writes to the leaders of the main opposition parties to authorise pre-election contacts with the Civil Service.
default&#xa0;
default5
default. 
defaultSince we now have a clearer idea of when an election is likely to take place, 
defaultit 
defaultis
default appropriate to fix a 
defaultprecise 
defaulttime at which this 
defaultauthorisation is issued
default (assuming the Opposition wants to hold talks)
default, replacing the present vagueness
default (‘an appropriate time’)
default. This amendment of the rules could 
defaultalso create a 
defaultfirm 
defaultpresumpti
defaulton that this process 
defaultwill
default begin
default at this 
defaultallotted 
defaulttime
default, 
defaultlessening
default any discretion available to the Prime Minister that may exist 
defaultunder the present wording
default.
default&#xa0;
default6. 
defaultC
defaultlarification of how precisely this contact is triggered is 
defaultalso 
defaultrequired. The manual tells us that ‘
defaultThe Cabinet Secretary has overall responsibility for co-ordinating this process once a request has been made and authorised by the Prime Minister.
default’ This sta
defaulttement seems to imply that a request must come from somewhere other than the Prime Minister (presumably the opposition leader or leaders), and that the Prime Minister can then consent to it. Yet the earlier part of the description cited above seems to sugg
defaultest that the Prime Minister 
defaultstarts
default the 
defaultprocess
default.
default&#xa0;
default7. 
defaultA reworded 
defaultaccount
default,
default creating
default a broad principle that such contacts were automatic 
defaultand setting out a timeframe for their commencement
default,
default could bypass present confusion
default 
defaultregarding when, how, and at whose initiative this process begins, as well as adapting arrangements to the era of fixed-term Parliaments
default.
default Any timetabling should build into it flexibility to allow for the contingency of an early General Election taking plac
defaulte
default, as provided for under the terms of the Fixed-term Parliaments Act
default.
default Yet it should ensure that, if a Parliament runs for the standard period, the talks begin at a defined point.
default&#xa0;
default8. 
defaultA minor point is that the reference to ‘main opposition parties’ in the 
defaultC
defaultabinet Manual
default text cited above is confusing. Presumably at present there is only one ‘main opposition’ party.
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultA second 
defaultgroup
default of concerns involve 
defaultwho is doing the talking, and about what. The manual tells us that
default: ‘
defaultThe meetings take place on a confidential basis, without ministers being present or receiving a report of discussions’. The reason that the UK Civil Service is able to perform this function is because of its long-established tradition of party-political im
defaultpartiality. 
defaultSenior officials are required to serve existing ministers with loyalty while retaining the ability to serve future such office-hol
defaultders, of whatever
default party, equally well. A particular value of t
defaulthis principle is that it can provide for stable tran
defaultsitions from one government to another, either following elections or possibly at other points.
default C
defaultontinuity
default, taken to excess,
default 
defaultw
defaultould be a proble
defaultm from a democratic perspective. But
default the possibility for smooth changeovers, 
defaultprovided it is
default accompanied by meaning
defaultful 
defaultshifts
default of 
defaultpolicy 
defaultdirection as appropriate, has attractions
default, particularly 
defaultbecause of
default its potenti
defaultal contribution to effective administration
default.
default&#xa0;
default10. 
defaultThe pre-election talks described in the manual are possible precisely because of th
defaultis
default tradition of impartia
defaultlity, and they contribute to the continuity that 
defaultimpartiality helps bring about. It is against this background that 
defaultcertain 
defaultCivil Service 
defaultreforms the government is implementing 
defaultrequire careful consideration. There seems to be an intention to give 
defaultsecretaries of st
defaultate enhanced discretion in selecting the senior officials closest to them and in senior roles in departments
default, through such 
defaultinitiatives
default as the introduction of Extended Ministerial Offices
default. 
defaultThese
default changes
default, which are underway,
default seem to
default entail k
defaultey civil servants having a clearer personal link to the particular politician 
defaultwho influenced their appointment to a given role
default. This practice raises general questions about the extent to which the Civil Service 
defaultcan
default continue to be a provider of stability ac
defaultross different governments; and has specific implications for the practice of pre-election talks. 
defaultOfficials who have a close association of this kind with a serving member of a government would not be well placed to take part in such contacts with the oppo
defaultsition, 
defaultgiven the delicate nature
default of such discussions
default.
default&#xa0;
default11. 
defaultThe manual also sets out the purpose and nature of these talks. It explains that they are intended ‘to allow the Opposition’s shadow ministers to ask questions about departmental organisation and 
defaultto inform civil servants of any organisational changes likely to take place in the event of a change of government.’ The manual goes on to note that ‘Senior civil servants may ask questions about the implications of opposition parties’ policy statements, a
defaultlthough they would not normally comment on or give advice about policies.’ These stipulations seem to be appropriate when the Civil Service 
defaultis
default de
defaultaling with an opposition par
defaultty, though the use of the 
defaultword ‘normally’
default could be a significant
default, if imprecise,
default qua
defaultlification.
default&#xa0;
default12. 
defaultHowever, the manual is
default silent regarding how the Civil Service might engage with a party that holds office
default in a coalition, and 
defaultcould
default therefore find itself either in a single 
defaultparty government or a differently composed coalition following a forthcoming General Election
default. 
defaultIs it appropriate, for instance, for officials to advise Conservative ministers in the coalition on negotiations with t
defaulthe European Union leading to a referendum on continued membership, should the Conservative Party win the next General Election? Equally, can officials discuss with Liberal Democrat ministers matters that they might seek to make part of a coalition programm
defaulte were a
defaultn agreement reached with 
defaultLabour after the next General Election? 
defaultIs it, indeed, appropriate to discuss the specifics of a possible renewed Conservative-Liberal Democrat programme
default with politicians from these parties (presumably presently serving min
defaultisters)
default? 
defaultIf the Civil Service has not yet considered these matters, it needs to. Any guidance that exists, or is produced in future, should be made public.
default&#xa0;
defaultCollective responsibility
default&#xa0;
default13. 
defaultThe 
defaultMinisterial Code
default iterates a key principle of UK government (that
default long predates the 
defaultappearance of the code itself): the collective responsibility of ministers. In the words of paragraph 
default2.1 
defaultof the code: ‘
defaultThe principle of collective responsibility, save where it is explicitly set aside, applies to all Government 
defaultMinisters’.
default 
defaultParagraph 2.3 of the codes states:
default&#xa0;
defaultThe internal process through which a decision has been 
defaultmade, or the level of Committee by which it was taken should not be disclosed. Decisions reached by the Cabinet or Ministerial Committees are binding on 
defaultall members of the Government. They are, however, normally announced and explained as the decision of the Minister concerned. On occasion, it may be desirable to emphasise the importance of a decision by stating specifically that it is the decision of Her 
defaultMajesty’s Government. This, however, is the exception rather than the rule.
default&#xa0;
default14. Paragraph 8.3 states that:
default&#xa0;
defaultMinisters should ensure that their statements are consistent with collective Government policy. Ministers should take special care in referring to 
defaultsubjects which are the responsibility of other Ministers.
default&#xa0;
default15. 
defaultAbsolute maintenance of these 
defaultprinciples is difficult even under single-
defaultparty government
default, given competition between ministers and party factions, and constant media scrutiny
default. 
defaultThe problems have 
defaultintensified under the coalition. 
defaultThe present government
default has, on the one hand, a need to function effectively, necessitating a degree of cooperation between its different components. 
defaultOn the other hand, 
defaultthe two parties comprising the coalition also have an e
defaultlectoral need to differentiate themselves from each-other.
default This imperative 
defaulthas led to senior ministers appearing publicly to disavow decisions that must have been taken at Cabinet level and therefore should be subject to collective responsibility
default, for inst
defaultance over health reforms early in the present Parliament
default. There is even a tendency for governmen
defaultt members to list policy ideas emanating from the other party in the coalition they successfully vetoed;
default or 
defaultconversely programmes they 
defaultwould like to have introduced but 
defaultthat their 
defaultcoalition partner
default prevented
default. These 
defaultglimpses behind the curtain of collective responsibility, even if they are 
defaultto an extent 
defaultstage-managed between the parties, are difficult to reconcile with the 
defaultMinisterial Code
default,
default and are problematic
default in themselves
default. They can create confusion about what present government policy is, including over crucial issues such 
defaultas UK membership of the European Union.
default This doubt can in turn undermine confidence in the government, and make democr
defaultatic accountability difficult.
default&#xa0;
default16. 
defaultThis rupture in collective responsibility is likely to widen as the General Election approaches
default, and campaigning becomes the overriding priority
default. Since it is difficult to imagine complete reversal of the tendency towards
default open dissent that has intensified under the coalition, it might be better swiftly to publish 
defaultsome rules of engagement. They could 
defaultset out a framework enabling public representatives of parties
default – perhaps not ministers –
default to set out publicly what party polic
defaulty was in contentious areas, stipulating the timing and form of such pronouncements, and who could make them.
default&#xa0;
default14 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default