&#xa0;
defaultWRITTENdefault EVIDENCE defaultFROMdefault ANDREW DUFF MEPdefault1. 
defaultI understand that you wish to focus your enquiry on the 
defaultlegal 
defaultramifications of the emerging 
defaultcorpus of
default 
defaultjudicial 
defaultinterpretations in
default national and European courts of
default the Charter of Fundamental Rights
default, and in particular 
defaulton the meaning of Protocol 
defaultNo 
default30. One
default 
defaultmay 
defaultlook forward to reading the advice 
defaultof the 
defaultlawyers. Ultimately, however, the question 
defaultof British respect for the Charter 
defaultis a political one and requires a parliamentary response. 
default2
default. 
defaultMy standing in the matter is as a member of the original 
defaultConvention which drafted the Charter
default and 
defaultof the 
defaultsubsequent 
defaultconstitutional Convention on the Future of Europe
default. 
defaultI 
defaultthen 
defaultrepresented the European Parliament at the Intergovernmental Conference which negotiated the Treaty of Lisbon. 
defaultI 
defaultwas the Parliament's co-Rapporteur on the Charter and then 
defaultR
defaultapporteur on the application by the Czech Republic to 
defaultjoin Protocol 
defaultNo 
default30, an exercise which 
defaulthas resulted
default in the first negat
defaultive Opinion by the Parliament against
default a revision of the EU Treaties
default (Article 48(3) TEU)
default.
default 
default3
default. No doubt your report will recognise
default,
default first, that the European Union is an integral part of the system of government of the United Kingdom and, second, that 
defaultthe UK is a full member state of the EU on a par with other member states. Unless and until the UK 
defaultnegotiates either to secede from the Union or to settle for a 
defaultyet-to-be-formulated type
default of EU associate membership short of full membership, the UK is bound to respect the terms of its membership as established in international, EU and UK law. 
defaultThe status of the Charter has been determined under the Treaty of Lisbon which the UK, having ratified the treaty, is bound to honour. T
defaulthe Charter of Fundamental Rights is installed as 
defaulta key 
defaultpart of the corpus of the primary law of the EU: in the hierarchy of norms, the Charter therefore has primacy over EU secondary legislation and over dome
defaultstic British law in so far as the Charter
default is applicable. 
default4
default. 
defaultWe are all 
defaultwell aware 
defaultof the complex and
default competitive nature of 
defaultEurope's 
defaultmulti-layered rights regime
default, and 
defaultthis phenomenon was explored by
default the House of Commons during the passage of the 
defaultHuman Rights Act 
defaultin 
default1998
default whose purpose wa
defaults to make more directly applicable the European Convention on Human Rights
default (ECHR)
default. However, since the Human Rights Acts came into being, the Charter of Fundamental Rights has been interspersed as a 
default'much wider' 
defaultbinding instrument at the level of the EU
default, offering, in its Article 52(3),
default ‘more extensive protection’ than 
defaultthe ECHR.
default 
defaultSo
default e
defaultven if 
defaultthe ECHR were to be relegated by a repeal of 
defaultthe Human Rights Act, the EU Charter would remain part of 
defaultBritish
default domestic law. 
default5
default. 
defaultThe Charter is now mandatory for the EU's ‘institutions, bodies, offices and agencies’ – in other words, all statutory authorities in the Union – when and in so far as they are applying or interpreting EU law or implementing its decisions.
default (Article 51 of the Charter says 'only when they are implementing' Union law: a clearer formulation, in my view, and one closer to the case-law of the European Court of Justice (ECJ), would be 'when they act within the scope' of Union law.
default) In any case, t
defaulthe Charter binds the UK as a member state of the Union and 
defaultwill therefore have
default 
defaultsome
default effect 
defaultor other 
defaultwithin the UK 
defaultin all matters where competences are conferred on the Union or powers 
defaultare 
defaultvested in the EU institutions and its agents 
default– of which the UK 
defaultGovernment
default is one 
default(Articl
defaulte 6(1) TEU).
default 
default6. The salience of fundamental rights to the history and evolution of the European Union should not be underestimated. Today the promotion of 
defaulta 
defaultrights
default-based EU citizenship
default can be considered as 
defaultcentral to
default the integration process. The Charter is the legal manifestation of the Union's political commitment. It articulates the rights and principles which shape the actions of the institutions and sets the benchmarks for countries which seek to join the Union. A serious and persistent breach of the Charter would jeopardise continuing membership of the Union. 
default7. The Charter was drafted, famously, 'as if' it were to become mandatory, and was treated with respect - certainly by the European Commission and European Parliament - since its signature at Nice in 2000. The 
defaultECJ
default, too, began to make references to the 
defaultdocument as one of its 
defaultinterpretative 
defaultsources before the Charter
default actually took on binding character at the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon in December 2009. 
default8. I labour these points somewhat because while the Charter has been underestimated in Britain it is seen elsewhere as 
defaulta key part of the constitutional order of the Union, 
defaulthelping
default to bridge the credibility gap between the EU and the citizen. 
defaultThe Charter lends itself to good governance, suitable for all, convenient for none. 
defaultIt is a comprehensive and visible catalogue of the rights, values and principles which 
defaultshape
default contemporary Europe. It makes the Union and its states better prepared for subsequent advances in integration as well as for further enlargement. It sets a uniform standard of rights across the Union which is the highest in the world. 
defaultThe elusive
default ‘future of Europe’
default would be unthinkable without the Charter which, reflecting as it does 
defaulta 
defaultbroad 
defaultco
defaultnsensus between left and right, religious and 
defaultsecular
default, 
defaultestablishes the template for EU citizenship. 
default9
default. 
defaultThe British, it is clear, seem exceptionally sensitive to the impact of the Charter. Yet the Charter Convention was
default in no doubt that 
defaultall EU 
defaultstates would have to adjust their national approaches to fundamental rights once the Charter became binding, and that this process of adjustment would also be a process of approximation between common law and Roman law traditions. The conferral of competences on the Union in the field of justice and home affairs would accelerate and add e
defaultxtra point to the
defaultse processes, and the Charter has rightly become
default a basic document in the efforts being undertaken to increase
default mutual cooperation between national public administrations, customs, police and judicial authorities. The EU’s 
defaultrecent 
defaultenlargement, the emergence of a wide range of common security measures in reaction to terrorism and international organised crime, data protection, border management, visa policy and efforts to forge common asylum and immigration policies all impinge directly and sensitively upon the terrain of hum
defaultan rights and civil liberties. As the emerging case law of the ECJ bears out, t
defaulthe Charter is highly relevant to the EU institutions as they both formulate and implement policy in all these areas. 
default10
default. 
defaultIn the Charter Convention, as well as subsequently, the UK 
defaultGovernment
default has stressed the importance of the Charter's 
defaultfour horizontal articles which 
defaultaim to 
defaultset out its scope and limitations, its field of application, the difference of interpretation between rights and principles, the level of protection afforded, and the prohibition of abuse of the rights. Typically, the UK 
defaultalso put weight on the 
defaultCharter’s explanatory memorandum
default which was 
defaultdrafted by the Praesidium of the Convention as a useful tool of interpretation
default.
default These explanations 
defaultare not in themselves justiciable – and were never intended to be so
default, but they 
defaultassist the courts in defining what is a ‘right’ which applies directly and what is a ‘principle’ which requires to be given form in EU legislation before it becomes justiciable. 
default11
default. The e
defaultxplanations 
defaultare 
defaultuseful in order to elucidate cases where the Charter goes further than the comparable provision of the ECHR, thereby providing a level of protection which is wider than that provided for in the UK Human Rights Act. One good example is Article 1 of the Charter (human dignity), which does not appear in the ECHR. Likewise, the right to good administration (Article 41 of the Charter) has no equivalent in the ECHR. Article 47 of the Charter (right to an effective remedy and a fair trial) is meant to afford wider protection than its ECHR eq
defaultuivalents (Articles 6 and 13). 
defaultThe explanations are also pertinent to the understanding of those
default provisions of the Charter that stem from provisions of Protocols of the ECHR which the UK has not ratified. One good example concerns the principle of 
defaultne bis in idem
default whose formulation in Article 4 of Protocol 7 of the ECHR is weak. Article 50 of the Charter, on the other hand, following case law at the Court of Justice in Schengen cases, is trenchant. 
default1
default2
default. Uniform application is a very important objective of the Charter. The Charter addresses the system of the Union 
defaultas a whole and not just part
default of it
default: it has
default to be applied uniformly in order to ensure legal certainty and coherence throughout the Union, applicable to all member states equally. This is the 
defaultin principle 
defaultline to be taken by the 
defaultEuropean Court of Justice
default and 
defaultit will be likely followed in this matter by 
defaultthe E
defaulturopean Court of Human Rights
default (ECtHR)
default. 
defaultIt falls to the ECJ to assess the compliance of national law which implements EU law with the provisions of the Charter. 
defaultHere the existence of Protocol No 30 is a problem should its purpose be to erect flood barriers against the tide of EU rights law which is intended to find its way up into Lord Denning’s famously English rivers and estuaries. The sight of the European Union being picky and choosy with its own rights regime is hardly edifying, and the UK’s launch of a Protocol which it sold 
defaultto the British public and 
defaultParliament
default as a tool to limit the force of the Charter in the UK won no plaudits from Britain’s EU partners.
default 
defaultThere was always the risk that where Britain led others would follow. Poland, for its own reasons, joined Protocol No 30 and the Czech Republic later sought to do so. One 
defaultmay note, too,
default that 
defaultHungary has recently 
defaultadopted a cavalier approach to the constitutional norms of the European Union
default, 
defaultthereby setting up 
defaultpotential conflicts of interpretation between the Hungarian and EU courts. 
default1
default3
default. The exposure of English common law to the law of other nations is large and continuing, and not just consequential on the formal international conventions to which the UK is a party. Over the years, the British Law Lords have made impressive contributions to the development of international comparative law. Where the ECHR is concerned, British judges have been rightly mindful of the need to maintain as uniform an interpretation as possible despite the heady variety of different legal cultures across the now 47 states of the Council of Europe. As Lord Bingham warned, ‘national application, beyond the margin of national appreciation for which the Convention allows, must inevitably lead to significantly differential application between state and state’.
default 
default14
default. While the ECHR remains among the general principles of the U
defaultnion’s law (Article 6(3) TEU)
default, it is the Charter 
defaultup
defaulton which the Union seeks to build a superior rights regime under the jurisdiction of the supranational Court at Luxembourg which, all things considered, and as part of the Union framework, can be expected to be more consistently reliable than its much larger and more diverse international counterpart at Strasbourg. The risk of incoherence between the two courts will be reduced by the imminent accession of the EU to the ECHR
default, as ordained by the Lisbon treaty (Article 6(2) TEU)
default. 
defaultThe accession by the EU to the ECHR was required not least by the UK 
defaultGovernment
default as the 
defaultquid pro quo
default for agreeing to give the Charter mandatory status. 
default15
default. The effect of this accession will be twofold. First, the EU will enjoy much the same relationship with the ECHR and the Strasbourg Court as that enjoyed by its member states. The 
defaultECtHR
default 
defaultwill become the external supervisor of the
default 
defaultECJ
default as 
defaultthe latter
default 
defaultdevelops human rights law specifically to cater for the scope and field of application of the law of the European Union. 
defaultAfter accession is completed, 
defaultthe 
defaultECHR 
defaultwill have to be seen and interpreted in and by the UK 
defaultnot only directly 
defaultby virtue of the Human Rights Act
default 
defaultbut also 
defaultthrough the prism of the Charter at least in so far as Eu
defaultropean Union law is concerned. 
defaultAccession will allow cases to be brought at Strasbourg against the EU institutions for alleged violations of the classical human rights as prescribed in the ECHR. A key issue in the accession negotiations is how to ensure that the Luxembourg Court will be able to judge on all matters of EU law before it may be said that all domestic remedies have been exhausted, after which exhaustion the route to Strasbourg is open. 
default16
default. Pending the delivery of the
default 
defaultanticipated preliminary ruling of 
defaultthe ECJ, the process of the EU’s accession to the ECHR is not yet concluded, and
default I will not deal further with the matter here.
default But I do believe that the overall settlement will be wholly beneficial to both courts and to the quality of rights jurisprudence in Europe. I am confident that the Court of Justice will soon act as a reference point for the ECtHR, setting high standards of case law in areas where the Charter goes further than the Convention, notably in cross-border and trans-national issues and in the ‘new’ areas of social, civil and environmental rights. 
defaultI cannot see why it is in the interests of British citizens to be isolated from these developments. 
default1
default7
default. In the light of the close association between the ECHR and the Charter, it 
defaultis paradoxical
default that the then Labour 
defaultGovernment
default chose to treat these two comparable European instruments in very different ways. While the intention of the Human Rights Act was to give the ECHR direct effect in the UK, that same 
defaultGovernment
default and 
defaultParliament
default sought to blunt and obscure the effect of the Charter in the UK by insisting on Protocol No 30 to the Lisbon treaty
default. 
defaultIn 2000 
defaulta
default 
defaultBritish 
defaultMinister of Europe, more than usually erratic, expostulated 
defaultto the press 
defaultthat the Charter 
defaultwould be
default ‘no more binding 
defaultthan the Beano
default’
default. 
defaultIn 2007 t
defaulthe 
defaultPrime M
defaultinister 
defaultboasted to
default the House of Commons: 
default‘
defaultIt is absolutely clear that we have an opt-out from both the Charter and judicial and home affairs
default’
default.
default 
defaultThe self-evident air of superiority or exceptionalism 
defaultin rights matters 
defaultevinced by 
defaultsuccessive British ministers
default 
defaultwa
defaults
default and is
default, in my view,
default 
defaultbadly 
defaultill-judged. 
defaultOne recalls that t
defaulthe original drafters of the ECHR, many of whom were British, presumed that the Convention would not apply much to the UK but, rather, to those European states which had succumbed to fascism, Nazism and communism. But, as we now know, many judgments of the ECtHR have in the event been levelled at the UK, especially in the fields of security of the person, right to fair trials and right to privacy where English law can be said to be deficient. 
default18
default. 
defaultWhatever the political argument behind Protocol
default No 30
default, it has had the effect of disturbing the principle of the uniform application of EU law. The 
defaultUK’s attempt to shield itself against the full ju
defaultsticiability of the Charter 
defaultimpair
defaults
default the Charter’s value for everyone else. 
defaultParticularly worrying is 
defaultthe Protocol’s assertion that UK courts will apply and interpret that Charter ‘st
defaultrictly in accordance’ with the 
defaultfamous 
defaulte
defaultxplanations
default – a statement which would seem to diverge radically 
defaultfrom the Treaty which says, merely, that the courts will pay ‘due regard’ thereto.
default 
default19
default. Likewise, all states accept
default 
defaultthat the Charter in itself does not extend ‘in any way’ the competences of the Union.
default But the bald statement in Protocol No 30 that the Charter ‘does not create new rights or principles’ goes some way further than the Charter itself, which says 
defaultsimply 
defaultthat it ‘does not extend the application of Union law beyond the powers of the Union or establish any new power or task for the Union, or modify powers and tasks as defined in the Treaties’.
default The Protocol may well 
defaultbe found in 
defaultconflict with the EU legal doctrine of implied powers, espec
defaultially as and when the legislature
default chooses to codify
default relevant Court of Justice case-
defaultlaw 
defaultgrounded
default 
defaultinter alia
default on the basis of the Charter. 
default2
default0
default. The UK’s main justification of its Protocol appears to have been an apprehension that Title IV of the Charter, entitled Solidarity, could lead to the demolition of its 
defaultown f
defaultlexible labour markets. 
defaultThe UK sought to limit the possibility that the Charter would give the EU new cause to legislate in areas, notably labour law, which would breach its 
defaultbrazen
default 
default'
defaultred lines
default'
default. 
defaultHowever, w
defaulthile 
defaultbeing 
defaultwholly 
defaultconsistent with the E
defaultCHR, and as the famous e
defaultxplanations explain, Title IV has 
defaulta wider scope to address the needs
default, anxieties and aspirations
default of contemporary European society. It draws not only on the ECHR but also on the European Social Charter (1961), the Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers (1989)
default, on standard ILO norms reflected by collective bargaining agreements at national and EU level,
default 
defaulton extensive EU legislation and 
defaulton case law of the Court of Justice. The Charter’s principles in respect of social policy become significant only 
defaultas and 
defaultwhen articulated in terms of EU legislation or executive action. 
defaultArticle 153(5) TFEU specifically precludes EU interference in matters of pay, the right of association, the right to strike and the right to impose lock-outs. Article 153(4) already lays down that no social policy provision of the EU shall affect the right of a member state to establish its own social welfare system or to affect the financing thereof. 
default21
default. In addition to these sector specific safeguards, there is the general obligation on the Union to respect the national identities of the member states ‘inherent in their fundamental structures, political and constitutional’ (Article 4(2) TEU). Moreover, the Charter must always be applied with due regard to the principle of subsidiarity
default (Article 5(3) TEU)
default.
default 
default22
default. Given 
defaultall of 
defaultthe above, t
defaultherefore, it is difficult to conceive of any circumstances in which litigation using t
defaulthe Charter 
defaultcould actually overturn the nostrums of British labour law or pay, social security, and employment policy
default. 
defaultAttempts to approach the Court of Justice either directly or indirectly by an aggrieved somebody who is unemployed or homeless in search of a job or a house will certainly fail. The Court will be assuredly conservative in its treatment of these issues (unless a case can be shown to concern directly and individually an employee of one of the EU institutions).
default23
default. 
defaultIt is worth recalling 
defaulthere 
defaultthat Poland
default, the other signatory of Protocol No 30,
default was keen to stop the Charter from curbing its own right to legislate in matters of public morality, family law, abortion, gay rights etc.
default Bizarrely, Poland also sought to emphasise, in adopting the British Protocol which was defensive against social rights as laid down in Title I
defaultV, that it (unlike the UK) ‘
defaultfully re
defaultspects social and labour rights’
default in the spirit of the Solidarity movement.
default 
defaultSubsequently, the Protocol appears to have been of no importance to the Polish judiciary, being regarded as an expression of the ideology of the then Law &amp; Justice party government
default of the Kaczynski brothers
default. A 
defaultPolish 
defaultconstitutional mechanism has 
defaultsince 
defaultbeen devised whereby Poland 
defaultcan
default decide to amend or to withdraw from the Protocol
default, and such a 
defaultpossibility 
defaultremains under review
default. 
default24
default. 
defaultThe Czech Republic
default, at
default the behest of its President
default Klaus
default, took the more eurosceptic stance. It achieved at the time of the 
defaultLisbon
default negotiations, its own categorical Declaration 53 which speaks of its concerns about the impact of the Charter on the principles of subsidiarity, conferral of competences, respect for national constitutions
default and international agreements. 
defaultThe official grou
defaultnd
default on which 
defaultMr Klaus
default 
defaultwas later to insist
default that the Czech Republic should join Protocol 
defaultNo 30 
defaultwas 
defaulthis
default concern about the 
defaultcontinuing
default v
defaultalidity of the Benes Decrees
default 
defaultthat dealt with 
defaultthe expropriation of the property and deportation of ethnic Germans from Czechoslovakia aft
defaulter the Second World War.
default 
defaultMr Klaus’s initiative was of questionable 
defaultlegal merit, not least because the matter of the Benes Decrees was comprehensively and definitively dealt with in the Czech treaty of accession to the EU. Moreover, s
defaultuch concerns had been
default absent from the political debate until early 2009 and were not 
defaultmentioned in submissions to the Czech c
defaultonstitutional court in either of 
defaultits
default 
defaultjudgments
default on the Lisbon treaty
default.
default Indeed, in the then government
default'
defaults official mandate for the negotiation of the 
defaultLisbon
default treaty it was a priority to establish a uniform standard of protection of human rights. 
defaultIt is important to note that subsequent to the negative Opinion of the European Parliament and to the retirement of Mr Klaus, the Czech bid to join Protocol No 30 has been dropped – presumably for good.
default25
default. 
defaultWe cannot, therefore, look to Warsaw or Prague for enlightenment as to the nature of Protocol No 30 beyond saying that its existence complicates matters. I still marvel at the 
defaultassertion
default i
defaultn the Court of Appeal
default by
default the repre
defaultsentative 
defaultof the UK 
defaultGovernment
default th
defaultat the purpose of the Protocol wa
defaults 
default‘
defaultnot to prevent the Charter from applying to the UK, but to explain its effect
default’
default.
default 
defaultWhatever else the Protocol is, self-explanatory it is not. It is unsurprising in these circumstances that t
defaulthe High Court incline
defaultd
default towards the view that Protocol 
defaultNo 30 
defaultcould be construed as a general opt-out from the Charter, 
defaultassuming
default that the Charter does not have direct effect in the UK. 
default26
default. 
defaultMy own view, on the other hand, inclines to that of 
defaultAdvocate-General Trstenjak 
defaultin her Opinion of 
default22 September 2011. 
defaultFirst, with regard to the Preamble of the Protocol, 
defaultt
defaulthe eighth recital of the Preamble establishes that the purpose of the Protocol is to 
default‘
defaultclarify certain aspects of the application of the Charter
default’
default. The seventh and twelfth recitals make it clear that, regardless of the Protocol, all other EU law applies fully to 
defaultPoland
default and the 
defaultUK
default. 
defaultThe Protocol is only relevant, therefore, if the Charter were to add to the existing general principles of EU law, or 
defaultto be
default wider in scope, or 
defaultto reduce
default the limitations on rights in comparison to the general principles. 
defaultI agree with A-G 
defaultTrstenjak
default that
default the Preamble reaffirms the 
default‘
defaultfundamental validity
default’
default of the Charter. 
default27
default. Second, with regard to the f
defaultield of application
default,
default 
defaultArticle 1(1) 
defaultof the Protocol 
defaultsupplements Article
default 51(2) of the Charter. Its intention is not to 
defaultextend
default the ability of the courts to find that 
defaultUK
default law is inconsistent with the Charter. However, neither does it seek to 
defaultcurtail
default the ability of the courts to assert a fundamental rights jurisdiction by reference to the provisions of the Charter. And in any case the courts must abide by fundamental rights as prescribed in the ECHR and as part of the general principles of EU law under the provisions of Article 6 TEU. The general principles enjoy constitutional status and may be relied upon by individuals in the courts. In this regard, people in 
defaultPoland
default and the 
defaultUK
default would seem to be in exactly the same position as people in all other EU states. 
default28
default. Third, with regard to s
defaultcope
default, t
defaulthe principles in Title IV 
defaultof the Charter 
defaultare required to have become
default the subject of national legislation before they become justiciable. Article 1(2) 
defaultof the Protocol 
defaultconfirms Article 51(1) of the Charter that the Charter does not create justiciable rights as between private individuals. It also attempts to clarify Article 52(1) of the Charter, and may have been conceived as an attempt to blunt the direct effect of the Charter. Yet it remains unclear which articles of Title IV would be regarded by the Court of Justice as having direct effect. And wherever 
defaultPoland
default and the 
defaultUK
default have provided for such rights in national law, there is no prohibition of justiciability on behalf of the ECJ. Moreover, as noted above, to the extent that Title IV represents general principles of EU law, the courts in 
defaultPoland
default and the 
defaultUK
default are bound to apply its provisions directly. 
default29
default. Fourth, with regard to i
defaultnterpretation
default, 
defaultArticle 2 of the Protocol seeks to clarify Article 52(4) and
default (6) of the Charter. Where the Charter refers to national laws and practices
default,
default 
defaultit
default refers specifically, in relation to 
defaultPoland
default and the 
defaultUK
default, to Polish and British laws and practices, respectively. (It could hardly be otherwise.)
default3
default0
default. 
defaultIn conclusion, Protocol 
defaultNo 30 
defaultdoes not exempt 
defaultthe 
defaultUK and Poland from the binding provisions of the Charter. It is not an 
default'
defaultopt-out
default'
default. It does not amend the Charter. Yet the very existence of the Protocol has given rise to legal uncertainty and political confusion
default not only in Poland and the UK but to all other states
default. 
defaultI
defaultf 
defaultthe Protocol 
defaultwere ever to be interpreted as having the effect of limiting the scope or force of the Charter
default'
defaults provisions, the result would be to lower the protection of fundamental rights afforded to people in Poland and the UK, and would therefore undermine the efforts of the EU to reach and maintain a uniformly high level of protection. 
default31
default. 
defaultAs it stands, however
default,
default the Protocol would seem not to alter the legal position which would pr
defaultevail if it were not to exist. That being the case, the effect of i
defaultts provisions
default, if any,
default would seem to apply 
defaultas much to other 
defaultmember states
default as it applies to Poland and the UK
default.
default 
default3
default2
default. All in all, i
defaultt is 
defaultdifficult to avoid the judgement that the UK 
defaultGovernment
default launched Protocol No 30 in the first place for entirely political reasons and not because it harboured genuine legal concerns about the Charter. 
defaultMy 
defaultrecommendation
default to your 
defaultCommittee, indeed, is that in the interests of legal certainty and political solidarity 
defaultyou recommend to 
defaultParliament that the UK
default abrogates Protocol No 30 at the next available 
defaultordinary 
defaultrevision of the EU Treaties.
default 
default33
default. One 
defaultfinal 
defaultrelated 
defaultissue
default concerns 
defaultthe number of ECHR Protocols to which the EU should accede
default when it signs and ratifies the Convention
default. The European Parliament argues that the EU should sign up to all Convention Protocols which are compatible with the Charter 
defaultof Fundamental Rights 
defaulton the grounds
default not only
default that the Union is 
defaultmore than 
defaultan aggregate of its member states 
defaultand 
defaultenjoys a federal character 
defaultsui generis
default, but also
default 
defaultthat the Charter is addressed in the first instance to the 
defaultEuropean 
defaultUnion and 
defaultonly in the second instance 
defaultto the states
default by virtue of their membership of the Union
default. 
defaultThe UK 
defaultGovernment
default, h
defaultowever, 
defaulttake
defaults
default the view that the Union should sign up only to those Convention Protocols to which all member states are signatories – in effect only Protocols No 1 and 6
default ECHR
default. I hope your 
defaultCommittee
default will support the European Parliament in this matter in order to avoid any regression from the Charter: it would surely be wise 
defaultfor the House of Commons 
defaultto follow the logic of the Lisbon treaty which sought to 
defaultattain
default the highest level and most uniform and comprehensive protection of
default rights
default for all citizens of the European Union – not excluding th
defaultos
defaulte 
defaultof British nationality and of other EU nationalities residing in the United Kingdom
default. 
default34
default. 
defaultIt would appear that the debate about creating 
defaulta separate UK Bill of Rights
default has run its course. That being the case
default, the British parliaments and courts must learn to take full cognisance of the EU Charter as the main source of rights law 
defaultthroughout the Union and at all levels
default. The Charter is 
defaultthe essential prism through which the ECHR must henceforth be interpreted
default in so far and as long as 
defaultthe UK remains a full member state of the EU. An essential condition of full membership is allegiance to the ECHR and the Charter. 
defaultAny attempt to reduce the UK’s legal and political adherence to the ECHR and the Charter will jeopardise Britain’s membership of the European Union. Your 
defaultCommittee
default would do well to make this point. 
defaultJanuary 2014
default1
default&#xa0;
default 
defaulthttp://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?type=TA&amp;language=EN&amp;reference=P7-TA-2013-208
default 
defaultAs Mr Justice Mostyn opines in AB v. Secretary of State
default. 
default Article 51(1) CFR. 
default See The Spinelli Group 
defaultA Fundamental Law of the European Union
default, Bertelsmann Stiftung, 2013, p. 114. 
default The EU’s competences are wide (Articles 2-6 TFEU), and its institutions are empowered to implement the Treaties across the entirety of the Union’s objectives (Article 3 TEU) and in accordance with its values (Article 2 TEU). Notably, the ECJ is to see that 'in the interpretation and application of the Treaties the law is observed' (Article 19(1) TEU).
default Article 52(7) CFR and 
defaultExplanations relating to the Charter of Fundamental Rights
default, OJ C 303, 14-12-2007, pp. 17-35.
default Tom Bingham, 
defaultWidening Horizons: The Influence of Comparative Law and International Law on Domestic Law
default, Hamlyn Lecture, CUP, 2010, p. 83. 
default Article 218(11) TFEU. 
default Tony Blair to the House of Commons on 25 June 2007. He went on: ‘[I]n respect of the two areas that people worried about most—the Charter of Fundamental Rights, on which people said, ‘Well, that is going to apply in British law’, and judicial and home affairs—we have opt-outs. That is what is different. With the greatest respect, it is important that people actually pay some attention to the facts when mounting their argument’. 
default Third recital of the preamble of the Protocol in comparison to the third sub-paragraph of Article 6(1) TEU. 
default Article 6(1) TEU. 
default Sixth recital of the preamble of the Protocol in comparison to Article 51(2) of the Charter. 
default Article 51(1) CFR. 
default Indeed, Poland obtained a Declaration 61 to that effect. 
default Declaration 62. 
default Helena Bončková, Hubert Smekal, 
defaultFragmentace společných hodnot? Výjimky z Listiny základních práv Evropské unie /Fragmentalization of Common Values? Opt-outs from the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union
default, in Soucasna Evropa 02, 2010.
default Ústav
defaultní soud - 2008/11/26 - Pl. ÚS 19/08: Treaty of Lisbon I; Ústavní soud - 2009/11/03 - Pl. ÚS 29/09: Treaty of Lisbon II.
default Case C-411/10, 
defaultNS v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default. 
default One 
defaultnotes that all member s
defaulttates 
defaultwithout exception 
defaultwere moved to sign Declaration 1 on the Charter. 
default Likely to start, in my estimation, in 2015
default with a Convention (Article 48(3
default) TEU). 
default