&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidenc
defaulte from 
defaultADEPT Traffic and Safety Working Group (SLC 061)
default&#xa0;
defaultBriefing Note for 
defaultHouse of Commons 
defaultTransport Committee re-
defaultSafety at Level Crossings
default&#xa0;
defaultADEPT represents directors and senior managers within Local Authorities who are responsible for policy and 
defaultservice
default provision relating to Transportation, Planning and the E
defaultnvironment
default. 
defaultThe organisation is based around a structure of lead subject steering committees. The relevant committee to this subject is Transport Committee.
defaultA specialist group exists advising 
defaultT
defaultransport Committee on road safety issues: this is known as the Traffic and Safety Working Group (TSWG). A representative of this group (Peter Atkins, Traffic Manager West Sussex County Council) was nominated to liaise and work with rail industry peers to 
defaultdrive forward and jointly develop a greater understanding and partnership working on road rail interface issues. These issues were a) level crossings, b) rail over road bridges and bridge strikes and c) road vehicle incursions on to the rail network. The l
defaultatter item is predominantly lead by the ADEPT Bridges Group. Bridges Group provides specialist knowledge to the ADEPT Engineering Committee.
defaultThe joint liaison group is Road Rail Interface Safety Group (RRISG) and ministered by the Rail Safety Stand
defaultards Boa
defaultrd (RSSB) on behalf of Network R
defaultail.
defaultPeter Atkins is also supported in this liaison 
defaultrole by Brian Thompson of Lincol
defaultnshire County Council.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is generally felt that the basic in
defaultformation contained within the 
defaultHighway C
defaultode is supportive of safety at level crossings. However, three items could benefit from improvement.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultAt local level, liaison between highway and rail authorities is
default variable. The issue of level crossing safety initiated Network Rail to set up Road Rail Partnership Groups (RRPGs) across the country in an effort to facilitate joined up thinking particularly around problem locations. The success of these has wavered alt
defaulthough network rail would state that they are in 
defaultoperation across the majority of the country. Although the intention has recently been to widen the remit of these groups to include bridge strikes and road vehicle incursions, this has not been widely realis
defaulted. The principle reason for this in the author’s opinion is that the three topic areas are championed by different departments within Network Rail. As a highway authority, it has to be said that there is little visible evidence of cross working inside Net
defaultwork Rail.
defaultOne 
defaultsafety related 
defaultexample concerns the policy of highway authorities ‘gritting’ over level crossings. Documented highway maintenance practice was based upon previous advice from network rail in that the salt distributed caused signal and track 
defaultcircuit failures. Over time some highway authorities have spread salt over level crossing surfaces on the basis that the risk to road users of not doing so is greater and, in the event of a collision where a road vehicle has skidded, could render the highw
defaultay authority liable on the basis it had failed its duty of care under The Highway Act. Research sponsored jointly through the Rail Safety Standards Board (RSSB) failed to show any evidence that ‘gritting’ over level crossings was detrimental to signalling 
defaultand track circuits
default and showed no failures or premature maintenance caused by corrosion of the rails. Thus, in the interests of interface safety Network Rail (Operations) agreed with highway authorities that ‘gritting’ should be carried out across level cro
defaultssings. Network Rail (Signalling) was not satisfied by the research and vetoed the agreement. Two years on, highway authorities are still awaiting the conclusion of this internal debate.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultIt would be jointly agreed by both highway and rail authoritie
defaults that the best solution would be to have no level crossings (ie. road rail interface) at all. Very few, if any, level crossings have been designed and built in recent decades. The issues around
default road layout design are quite historic.
defaultMost level crossings were developed as a result of railway tracks authorised by Acts of Parliament needing to cross much smaller paths used by local travellers and villagers.  There was no motorised traffic; most bei
defaultng horse drawn or pedestrian. Consequently, the infrastructure around a crossing point has grown with evolution of towns and cities. Much infrastructure is now in
default place such that to redesign an
default ideal road layout would require an unacceptable political will
default and significant budget
default to 
defaultpurchase large plots of land with, in many cases, property demolition.
defaultTo sum up the current status it could be said that in 99% of all locations, knowing what we know today about transport and starting with a clean sheet, 
defaultengineers would not design the road/rail layouts we find today.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultExamples shared between Network Rail and highway authorities have often showed that rail interface safety considerati
defaultons do not feature heavily on the checklist of Local Planning Authorities. It is believed that Network Rail, who are often (but not always) consulted regarding planning applications have frequently made a response that indicates there is a potential increa
defaultse in 
defaultsafety risk associated with a particular application. Regrettably, since the assessment of that risk is either not understood by those considering planning applications or they perceive the risk to be small (usually based upon frequency alone rather 
defaultthan a consideration of 
defaultconsequence of an inci
defaultdent – eg. fatality), the concerns are waived and planning permission is granted with little or no mitigation conditions imposed upon developers. This is particularly a concern where there are existing nearby p
defaultublic footpaths that cross the railway which may expose the dangers of the railway to unsupervised children residing in a new development.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe issue here is one of cost. Often the likely costs 
defaultof the improvements required to the infrastructure will far exceed the level of s106 monies available. There is also a tendency for Local Planning Authorities to direct s106 monies towards more visible, tangible and popular local projects.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is the experience of the authors that there is no regular stream of feedback to highway authorities. In most cases any such follow up would rely upon the local working relationship
default between road and rail authorities. Th
defaulte most useful process for feedback was via the RRISG meetings where reports and data from incidents, near misses and investigations from Network Rail, British Transport Police
default (BTP)
default and Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) could be thoroughly debated 
defaultand conclusions/recommendations could be agreed.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe route for undertaking research was, again, through the RRISG
default. Suggestions for research from both road and rail sectors would be proposed, managed and carried out by 
defaultRSSB. Highway authority safety budgets are much reduced over the last five years and a pay-back is always sought in terms of casualty reduction. The bare truth is that there are more fatalities caused by road vehicles collisions outside the road rail inter
defaultface and consequently there are no local authority funds available for research work in this area.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe comments above indicate that there is much work that needs to continue between both road and rail authorities and associated bodies, 
defaultsuch as BTP, DfT and Train Operators. The UK has the best safety record in the world and this is because the subject is treated with the seriousness it deserves and has willing contributors to joint working to maintain this record. It would be dangerous to
default approach this subject area with complacency.
defaultHowever, ADEPT must express its concern that Network Rail has unilaterally decided to withdraw its commissioning of RSSB in administering the RRISG. This has been superseded by two separate groups to be managed
default by 
defaultN
defaultetwork 
defaultR
defaultail. As yet there is no approach from Network 
defaultR
defaultail to include highway authorities in either of these groups. This will undoubtedly result in 
defaultisolation and silo working by the two industries. Risking the very basis of the UK excellence as descr
defaultibed above.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultPeter Atkins, West Sussex County Council
default&#xa0;
defaultBrian Thompson, Lincolnshire County Council
default&#xa0;
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default