&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultProfessor defaultBrice Dickson, defaultProfessor of International and Comparative Law, default                                  defaultQueen’s University Belfast (CRJ 16)default&#xa0;default‘The constitutional role of the judiciary if there were a codified Constitution: a view from Northern Ireland’
default&#xa0;defaultI have structure
defaultd
default my evidence in line with the terms of reference of the Committee’s inquiry.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultIn Northern Ireland talk of a codified Constitution for the United Kingdom is likely to be divisive. Regardless of the content of any such codification, unionists will most probably see its very existence as a 
defaultc
defaultement
defaulting 
defaultof Northern Ireland’s current constitutional status, while nationalists will see it as an attempt to ignore th
defaulte fact that 
defaultNorthern Ireland is 
defaultmaterially 
defaultdifferent
default from other regions of the UK
default. During the recent debates on whether there should be a Bill
default of Rights for the United Kingdom
default (leading to the split report by the Commission 
defaulton a Bill of Rights 
defaultin December 2012)
default, many commentators of a nationalist disposition
default in Northern Ireland
default wanted nothing to do with the concept because they saw it as implying
default a strengthening of ties between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Even if 
defaulta
default codified Constitution were to say nothing more about the constitutional status of Northern Ireland than what is already stated in the Northern Ireland Act 1998 (which reflects t
defaulthe Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement
default)
default, it would be portrayed by the various political parties in different ways. Unionists tend to see the Belfast (Good Friday) Agreement as conclusive
default – a 
defaultdestination. Nationalists tend to see it as transitional
default – a 
defaultstep
defaultping
default stone
default to something better (for them).
default&#xa0;
defaultIt follows that if the judiciary in Northern Ireland were to be involved in interpreting 
defaulta
default codified Constitution 
defaultthe judges would be
default 
defaultalmost 
defaultbound to 
defaultbe accused of being
default in some way politically biased.
default This criticism 
defaulthas not been made in recent years because
default, although
default the Northern Ireland Act 1998 is
default already
default a 
defaultkind of 
defaultconstitution for Northern Ireland, it is 
defaultnevertheless 
defaultan ordinary Act of Parliament
default and so
default can be interpreted using a
defaultny of a number 
defaultof tools for statutor
defaulty interpretation 
defaultcurrently 
defaultavailable. 
defaultJ
defaultudges have not been required to give the Act any ‘higher’ status. It is true that, on occasions, very senior judges, especially in the House of Lords or Supreme Court, have treated the 1998 Act as if it were indeed a 
defaultconst
defaulti
defaulttutional statute. But those comments must now be seen against the backdrop of decisions such as 
defaultWatkins v 
defaultSecretary of State for the 
defaultHome 
defaultDepartment
default 
default[2006] UKHL 17, 
defaultwhere
default the House of Lords made it abundantly clear that there are no such things as constitutional rights and that drawing a line between constitutional statutes and ordinary statutes 
defaulti
defaults a
defaultn unnecessary
default 
defaultand 
defaultperilous exercise. 
defaultIt is 
defaultalso 
defaulttrue that the 
defaultHouse of Lor
defaultds and 
defaultSupreme Court ha
defaultve
default been particularly respectful of the devolution Acts 
defaultin
default all three devolved regions 
defaultof
default the UK (see 
defaultRobinson v Secretary of State for Northern Ireland
default [2002] UKHL 32, 
defaultAXA 
defaultGeneral Insurance Ltd 
defaultv
default Lord Advocate
default [2011] UKSC 46,
default 
defaultand 
defaultAtto
defaultrney General v National Assembly for Wales Commission
default [2012] UKSC 53), 
defaultbut
default in a recent decision the 
defaultSupreme Court did hold that the Scottish Parliament had acted outside its competence (see 
defaultSalvesen v Riddell
default [2013] UKSC 22).
default 
default   
default      
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultI am not sure that any formal consultation would be necessary, given the need to respect the separ
defaultation of powers doctrine. It would be unwise for judges to comment on potential provisions in a codified Constitution because they might then have to recuse themselves at a later stage if the meaning of the provisions were to come before them (see 
defaultDavidson
default v Scottish Ministers
default [2004] UKHL 34). The consultation that took place with the Law Lords when the establishment of the Supreme Court was proposed was more understandable, since the abolition of the Appellate Committee 
defaultwould have
default significant consequences for the judges’
default own
default 
defaulte
defaultnvironment
default and working methods
default; even so, the split which emerged amongst their Lordships 
defaulto
defaultn th
defaultat
default matter was embarrassing and 
defaultdid nothing to enhance p
defaultublic confidence in the independence of the judiciary.
default Askin
defaultg judges in Northern Ireland to comment on a draft codified Constitution would be most unwise as it would inevitably involve them in issues that are even more politically sensitive in Northern Ireland than in Great Britain.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultI believe it would be sensible to limit the courts’ power to issuing a ‘declaration of incompatibility with the Constitution’. As with
default declarations of incompatibility 
defaultthat can be 
defaultissued a
defaultlready
default under section 4 of the Human Rights Act 1998, such a declaration 
defaultw
defaultould not affect the validity of the piece of legislation in question nor alter the rights and duties of the parties to the litigation in which the matter arises. But there 
defaultw
defaultould 
defaultneed to 
defaultbe some provision in the Constitution which requires a parliamentary a
defaultnd/or governmental reaction to a judicial ‘declaration of incompatibility with the Constitution’
default – something a bit more mandatory than section 10 of the Human Rights Act 1998
default. Having a codified Constitution does not of itself require that a court be given 
defaultthe power to 
defaultinvalidate some law on the grounds of unconstitutionality. I think the model set by the Human Rights Act is ideal because it does not confer excessive power on judges, who 
defaulthave no electoral mandate
default, yet it imposes a
defaultn
default 
default(
defaultalbeit 
defaultweak)
default obligation o
defaultn the government to do something to correct the 
defaultincompatibility
default. 
defaultAfter the courts have issued a declaration of incompatibility with the Constitution o
defaultne option for the government would be to seek an amendment to the Constitution, through whatever mechanism
defaults are made available 
defaultfor that purpose
default in the Constitution itself, so as to make the challenged law 
defaultand the Constitution 
defaultno longer incompatible.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThe Committee might usefully examine the experience of the Republic of Ireland in this context. A commonly 
defaultheld view there is that on occasions the Supreme Court has wielded too much power by declaring certain legislative provisions to be unconstitutional. If the judges
default in Ireland
default had had a lesser power (e.g. to declare merely an incompatibility)
default,
default some undesira
defaultble political and financial consequences 
defaultmight
default have been avoided. 
default   
default 
defaulta) What would be the implications of these powers on existing constitutional doctrines, including parliamentary sovereignty and judicial review?default&#xa0;
defaultAs stated above, it is possible to have a system whereby judges can declare Acts of Parliament to be incompatible with the Constitution but not invalidate them. But to maintain the credibility of the Constitution in such a situation it would be important t
defaulto have a provision in the Constitution mandating parliament and/or the government to react in a way which eliminates the incompatibility. It should be remembered that the Acts devolving power to the Scottish Parliament and to the Welsh and Northern Ireland
default Assemblies make provision for courts to suspend the effect of a declaration of legislative incompetence to allow time for the devolved government to rectify the matter
default. This was exercised for the first time in
default 
defaultSalvesen v Riddell
default [2013] UKSC 22.
default 
defaultb) In thdefaulte context of question 3, what can we learn from the interaction between the UK courts and the European Court of Justice and European Court of Human Rights?default&#xa0;
defaultI have made a detailed study of the interaction between the top UK court and the European Court of 
defaultHuman Rights (
defaultHuman Rights and the United Kingdom Supreme Court
default, OUP, 2013). I was able to demonstrate, I hope, that even today the top UK court and the Strasbourg Court are not always on the same wavelength – which is why a ‘dialogue’ between the courts i
defaults often useful. To date the Strasbourg Court has usually allowed member states a wide margin of appreciation as regards their internal constitutional arrangements (prisoner voting rights is an exception to this). Throughout the troubles in Northern Ireland
default the European Court of Human Rights did not play a significant role in protecting human rights in Northern Ireland: it really only began to do so after the ceasefires were announced in 1994. The Strasbourg Court continues to defer rather meekly to national
default governments when the latter decide that there is a public emergency threatening the life of the nation (see 
defaultA v UK
default (2009) 49 EHRR 29, the follow-up decision on the indefinite detention of foreign nationals in Belmarsh prison).
default&#xa0;
defaultThe nature of the jurisdict
defaultion of the Court of Justice of the EU (being mainly advisory, through ‘preliminary rulings’) is such that a codification of the UK’s Constitution ought not to make a significant difference. It is conceivable, though, that the 
defaultFactortame
default-type scenario – whe
defaultre a UK court is allowed to ‘disapply’ an Act of Parliament because of its inconsistency with EU law – could cause serious difficulties if it were 
defaultto arise in a context where the inconsistent provision was a provision in the Constitution. Given the anti-EU
default sentiments which seem to abound in certain political circles within the UK at the moment, it is entirely possible that the codified Constitution will contain such inconsistent provisions. The document will have to make it abundantly clear how any such inc
defaultonsistency is to be dealt with by the national judiciary. What the CJEU makes of the inconsistency is largely beyond the UK’s control. I do not think there is any particular Northern Irish dimension to this issue.  
default      
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultA priori
default constitutional review is possible in Ireland and in France. On the 
defaultwhole, it has not worked particularly well
default in either jurisdiction
default. In Ireland the problem is that
default,
default once a court has made a decision on the constitutionality of a Bill before it becomes an Act
default,
default there can be no further challenge to the constitutionality of a
defaultny aspect of that Act after it has been passed (Article 
default34.3.3 of the 1937 Constitution). In France 
defaulta priori
default review by the Conseil constitutionnel was deemed to be an inadequate mechanism by itself, so in 2010 the Conseil was given the power to conduct 
defaulta 
defaultposteriori
default reviews as well. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIn general, judges rightly shy away from considering 
defaultt
defaulthe constitutionality of laws 
defaultin abstracto
default: they prefer to consider them in concrete cases. 
defaultIn Northern Ireland, since the Government of Ireland Act 1920, it has always been
default possible to refer Bills to a court 
defaultin order 
defaultto check whether the devolved legislature has the competence to make that law (the court in question used to be the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council but since 
defaultOctober 2009 it has been th
defaulte Supreme Court).
default 
defaultReferences to the Privy Council during the days of the Stormont Parliament were 
defaultvery 
defaultrare, and never led to a Bill being declared beyond th
defaultat
default Parliament’s competence. There has not yet been a reference to the Supreme Court
default concerning a Bill before the Nort
defaulthern Ireland Assembly
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultPersonally I am in favour of 
defaulta priori
default consideration of Bills being left to the political domain. The availability of judicial review at the 
defaulta posteriori 
defaultstage should be an adequate safeguard. If the point is made that the latter depends on some wealthy and/or courageous litigant bringing the matter to court, this can be answered by giving a power to some external actor – the Attorney General or the Human R
defaultights Commission perhaps – to bring the matter to court, much as the Northern Ireland Human Rights Commission 
defaulthas done
default in relation to the inability of unmarried couples to apply to adopt children
default (
defaultRe NIHRC’s Application for Judicial Review
default [2013] NICA 37)
default.
default   
default 
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultIn 
default2004 I published a chapter in an edited collection in which I considered, but rejected, the idea that 
defaultthere should be a Constitutional Court for Northern Ireland (‘A Constitutional Court f
defaulto
defaultr Northern Ireland?’ in Andrew Le Sueur
default (ed)
default, 
defaultBuilding the UK’s New Supreme Court
default, OUP, 2004, 49-66
default).
default I hold the same view in relation to the idea of a Constitutional Co
defaulturt for the United Kingdom. I support the view that the Supreme Court should be the final court for all legal matters in the United Kingdom, constitutional or otherwise. The fact that the Supreme Court is currently, in effect, the constitutional court as f
defaultar 
defaultas 
defaultthe extent of dev
defaulto
defaultl
defaultv
defaulted
default powers are concerned is evidence of the fact that that court can consider constitutional issues just as effectively as any other body. Besides, the demarcation of labour issues that can arise whenever a country has more than on
defaulte top court make it sensible to 
defaulthave
default a more hierarchical structure. South Africa, France and Germany all suffer from 
defaultdemarcation issues
default to some extent, although Germany less so on account of its clearer provisions on jurisdiction.
default&#xa0;
defaultIf a separate Constituti
defaultonal Court were to be created, the system for appointing its members would need to ensure that a view from Northern Ireland (and other devolve regions) is available to the Court.    
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultI addressed this precise issue during the course of my inaugural professorial lecture at 
defaultQueen’s University in 2006 (
default‘
defaultThe role of judges in the development of constitutions’ (2006) 57 Northern Ireland Legal Quarterly 332-351
default; appended to this evidence
default). At pages 337 to 344 I drew upon the experience of the US, France, Ireland, India, South Afr
defaultica and Canada to show what judges 
defaultcan 
defaultdo to support constitutionalism. I then made ten suggestions for how judges should reform the UK’s Constitution (pages 344 to 
default351). 
default&#xa0;
defaultIt must be remembered that the power of judges in the US to strike down Acts of Con
defaultgress as unconstitutional was not conferred by the US Constitution but was grabbed by the Supreme Court in 
defaultMarbury v Madison 
default(1803). What makes the power of the US Supreme Court somewhat frightening in this context – and the underlying reason, perhaps, why
default the Court has been much criticised of late for being too activist – is the fact that amending the US Constitution is very difficult indeed to achieve, as the 
defaultfailure to obtain enough state ratifications for the Equal Rights Amendment in 1982 (guaranteeing
default rights for women) clearly indicates. 
default&#xa0;
defaultOn the other hand, it is commonly acknowledged that the Supreme Court of India has been 
defaulttoo
default activist in recent years, usurping the powers of the Indian Parliament and in effect making laws that the judges have no rea
defaultl expertise in devising. Australia, to my mind, is a good example of where the written Constitution of 1900 has had a deleterious effect on the judiciary: it has forced them to spend a lot of time trying to interpret language that is out of date and not ob
defaultviously relevant to the 21st century. Some would say the same about the US Constitution, as evidenced by the US Supreme Court’s recent decision on the right to bear arms: 
defaultDistrict of Columbia v Heller
default 554 US 570 (2008). 
default&#xa0;
defaultIf we are not to lead ou
defaultr
default judges down blind alleys and on wild goose chases we must ensure that any codified Constitution clearly sets out not just the powers of the judges but also the limits to those powers and the ways in which the
default judges
default should go about exercising them.    
default 
default 
default  
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
defaultAPPENDIXdefaultTHE ROLE OF JUDGES defaultIN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CONSTITUTIONSdefault&#xa0;
defaultIntroductiondefaultThe debate about the role of judges in the British constitution has been prolific and fierce in recent years. It has, though, tended to focus too much on history and not enough on possible futures. It has concentrated on the ‘is’ and 
defaultnot on the ‘ought’. And, like many debates, it has degenerated into one where there are basically two opposing camps, neither of which is prepared to give much ground to the other. There are a few outliers, but these too tend to squabble over their exact p
defaultosition vis-à-vis the other protagonists rather than rising above the fray and adopting a more positive frame of mind. What is needed is a more holistic approach, one which recognises that there are advantages in both main positions, as well as in their va
defaultriants, but which prefers to focus not on whether judges are more important than law-making politicians in maintaining constitutionalism but on what steps each of those élites should take to copper-fasten the constitution against the vicissitudes of 21
defaultst
default c
defaultentury living. Judges in most other countries do play a crucial role in developing their national constitutions. Judges in the UK have, on the whole, underperformed in that area, at least in the last few decades. Now is the time for them to raise their gam
defaulte. 
defaultThe article begins by summarising the current debate. It then proceeds to review some of the contributions made by judges to constitutions elsewhere than in the United Kingdom. In its final section it makes and tries to justify ten suggestions as to ho
defaultw Britain’s top judges should reform the British constitution. Throughout, the article takes a broad approach to the term ‘constitution’. In particular it embraces within that term the rules and principles governing judicial freedom of action.    
defaultThe currdefaultent debatedefaultIn March 2004 Adam Tomkins delivered his inaugural lecture as the Professor of Public Law at the University of Glasgow, a lecture which he later expanded into book form.
default In this book he launched a passionate attack against those who advocate th
defaulte theory known as ‘common law constitutionalism’ – the idea that at the core of the British constitutional order lies the common law made by judges. Tomkins belittled the views of commentators such as Jeffrey Jowell and Dawn Oliver at University College Lo
defaultndon and Paul Craig at Oxford. He had the temerity to undermine that guru of the common law, Ronald Dworkin.
default And he had a go, too, at Sir John Laws, the Court of Appeal judge who has extolled the virtues of the common law in extra-judicial writings
default as we
defaultll as in his own judgments.
default Particular opprobrium, however, 
defaultwas reserved for Trevor Allan at Cambridge.
default Tomkins described Allan as a ‘hardliner’ and labelled the breadth of his support for constitutional justice as ‘staggering’. To Allan, said Tomkins, ‘it seems that there is no constitutional problem that is incapable of being solved by the courts and [tha
defaultt] no constitutional problem is solved until it is solved by the courts’. Tomkins thought this was ‘legal constitutionalism at its most extreme’.
default 
defaultInstead of relying upon the courts as the guardians of the constitution, Tomkins promotes the notion of 
default‘political accountability’. Prior to acquiring his chair he had written articles defending what he called ‘the political constitution’,
default a throwback to the phrase used by John Griffith in the 1970s.
default In such works Tomkins has to some extent been following 
defaultthe lead given by Martin Loughlin at the London School of Economics and Political Science, in three books published since 1992.
default The reliance placed by Tomkins and Loughlin on the essentially political nature of the constitution  is not so very far removed
default from the views of those who, like Christopher Forsyth and Mark Elliott at Cambridge,
default still maintain the rather Diceyean line that all judicial development of the law must ultimately be traced back to the supposed intention of Parliament. Tomkins’ approac
defaulth has to some extent been bolstered by the likes of Thomas Poole, who claims that common law constitutionalism fails to adequately explain the main features of the way judicial review actually operates in Britain.
default Poole sees judges as aristocrats and mora
defaultl imperialists.
default Another lawyer at Glasgow, Gavin Anderson, makes three further criticisms of common law constitutionalism (or, rather, of what he calls ‘rights constitutionalism’): he believes that it fails to control private, as opposed to public, power;
default it 
defaultignores the significance of the practices and actors of the global economy; and it considerably overstates the capacity of judges to be coherently instrumental.
default In Anderson’s words, ‘judges, like other law-creating subjects, construct distinctive pers
defaultonal accounts of the legal world, whose mutual interaction necessarily leads to inconsistency and contradiction’.
default 
defaultNot surprisingly, well-known attempts have been made to pigeon-hole those who write in this area by giving them fancy labels. Martin Loughli
defaultn describes people who place great emphasis on the work of the courts as ‘conservative normativists’; those who prefer to place their trust in Parliament and in politics, Loughlin calls ‘functionalists’.
default He reserves a third label for people who believe th
defaultat courts should not have the final say over everything but should at least articulate principles which can guide the executive in the exercise of its discretions. This category should, I think, embrace people like Sir William Wade (that much-lamented icon
default of British constitutional law who died in 2005
default), Robert Stevens (still writing about British judges 50 years after his first article was published
default) and Sir Neil MacCormick, the eminent legal philosopher at Edinburgh whose latest book, 
defaultRhetoric and the R
defaultule of Law
default, provides many insights into the nature of judicial reasoning. These people, in Loughlin’s terms, are ‘liberal normativists’. If, like me, you have an in-built aversion to such grandiose labels you might prefer the much more prosaic categories s
defaultuggested by Carol Harlow and Richard Rawlings, who simply talk of red-light and green-light approaches.
defaultMy own approach lies somewhere between red and amber. In Loughlin’s terms I’d be a ‘liberal-conservative normativist’. This means that, in my view, jud
defaultges can and should play a very significant role in shaping constitutions. They should actively seek to control both the government and Parliament, preventing those institutions from damaging the rule of law and the separation of powers. There should be ver
defaulty few issues which are non-justiciable. At the same time, the power of judges should not be unbridled. The judiciary should be just one site in which sovereignty is located. Power must also reside in other sites,
default and values other than legal ones must be p
defaultromoted. But judges bring relative detachment, valuable experience and absolute integrity to their work. We should, therefore, give them a fairly free rein.
default We should not, I think, adopt the approach of Horace Walpole, who in 1770 wrote in a letter: ‘Ever
defaultybody talks of the constitution, but all sides forget that the constitution actually works 
defaultextremely well, if they would let it alone’.
default Letting it alone should not be considered an option today.
default 
defaultIn any event, the critics of common law constitutionalism 
defaulttend to ignore some important ‘modern’ features of the British legal system. For a start, they do not generally respect the influence of European institutions. Anyone wishing to remind themselves of that influence should consult the writings of Nicholas Ba
defaultmforth.
default He brings a dose of realism to the debate by observing that no theory about today’s UK constitution can be valid unless it explains why a British court will ‘disapply’ an Act of Parliament if it is inconsistent with EC law or why, as a result of t
defaulthe Human Rights Act, courts are free to disagree with Parliament – not just with government – that a piece of primary legislation is compatible with the European Convention on Human Rights. Bamforth endorses what Gordon Anthony usefully describes as the ‘s
defaultpill-over’ effect – the idea that courts in the UK are influenced by European considerations even though the specific matter at issue is not regulated by EC law or the Convention.
default The main message coming from Bamforth’s and Anthony’s analyses, with which 
defaultI agree, is that reports of the death of common law constitutionalism are greatly exaggerated. 
defaultAnd if such reports were exaggerated three or four years ago, they are even more so today because in the last few years there has been a renaissance of interest
default in the rule of law on the part of our top judges, the Law Lords. Those judges are, of course, about to metamorphose into Justices of the UK’s Supreme Court,
default although not, it seems, before October 2009.
default When that occurs, their role as guardians of our co
defaultnstitution will surely become even more obvious.
default As it is, Law Lords are already standing their ground against New Labour’s increasing authoritarianism.
default Their two recent decisions on the position of foreign detainees at Belmarsh prison are, it is to be h
defaultoped, not just straws in the wind but emblems of a whole new spirit of judicial activism.
default At the end of 2004 eight Law Lords ruled that internment 
defaultwithout trial under the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001 was contrary to the European Convention’
defaults guarantee of the right not to be deprived of liberty on a discriminatory or disproportionate basis.
default They measured the Act against Article 15 of the Convention, which is not one of the articles incorporated by the Human Rights Act, so this is a further e
defaultxample of Anthony’s ‘spill-over’ effect. A year later a unanimous bench of seven Law Lords ruled that no British court can rely upon evidence that may have been obtained anywhere in the world through the use of torture.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultA close reading of the judgments 
defaultin both those cases could surely leave no-one in any doubt that the highest court in the land plays an absolutely crucial role not just in protecting human rights but in curbing the excesses of Parliament and the executive. Yet in his comments on the first
default of these decisions, Adam Tomkins damns with faint praise.
default He claims that the Law Lords were ‘merely following a path already broken by others’ and that ‘the change of tone…should not mislead us into thinking that it heralds a change of approach’. His jus
defaulttification for this view is that after the judgments were issued the Belmarsh detainees were still in prison and the rest of the Anti-terrorism Act was still on the statute book. He seems to be saying that unless judges can completely usurp the functions o
defaultf elected politicians they are entirely useless. To adapt his own phrase, this is surely republicanism at its most extreme. 
defaultTo appreciate better the contribution judges could and should make to the UK’s constitution one needs to look abroad.
default The next sec
defaulttion of this article will conduct a brief survey of some leading liberal democracies to see what innovations could possible be mirrored in Britain. 
defaultContributions to constitutionalism made by judges elsewheredefault 
defaultThe American Constitution, one often reads, is
default be applauded for the way it permits the Supreme Court to invalidate Acts of Congress if they are ‘unconstitutional’. But of course that power was not conferred by the 1787 document signed by George Washington and others, nor by the first 10 amendments whi
defaultch were agreed in 1791 and which we call the Bill of Rights. Instead, the power was created 
defaultfor itself
default by the US Supreme Court. In 
defaultMarbury v Madison
default,
default 
defaultin 1803, Chief Justice Marshall skilfully gave President Jefferson the result he was 
defaulthoping for by holdin
defaultg that the attempt by the previous President, John Adams, to appoint a number of federal judges before he left office, was ineffective. This was because the Act of Congress
default authorising the Court to enforce the appointments was held not to be valid. Under 
defaultArticle III of the Constitution the Court had been given a number of specific functions and without express authorisation Congress had tried to expand those functions. Very cleverly the Court denied to itself the lesser power to enforce judicial appointmen
defaultts but in the very act of doing so conferred on itself the much greater power to declare Acts of Congress to be unconstitutional.
defaultIt is on this slender foundation the whole edifice of judicial review in America has subsequently been constructed, although i
defaultnstances of Acts being declared unconstitutional remain rare. It did occur when Franklin Roosevelt was pursuing his New Deal ideology in the 1930s, and the Supreme Court’s stance on that occasion is sometimes taken, wrongly I think, as an illustration of j
defaultudicial opposition in America to the notion of social and economic rights.
default The truth is that the New Deal case turned on a different point altogether, namely on whether Congress had delegated too much power to an administrative agency without giving it ad
defaultequate guidance on how to exercise that power. If anything, therefore, the decision was a blow in favour of constitutionalism and a few years later the Supreme Court had little difficulty in upholding different New Deal legislation which was more clearly d
defaultrafted.
defaultBut it is worth noting that in recent years considerable scepticism has been voiced in America about the current Supreme Court’s commitment to constitutionalism. Disdain for judges’ constitutional work has been displayed, for example, by Mark Tush
defaultnet of Georgetown Law School, in books with provocative titles such as 
defaultThe New Constitutional Order 
defaultand 
defaultTaking the Constitution Away from the Courts
default, where he argues that the credit usually accorded to the US Supreme Court for maintaining the rule of law 
defaultis grossly overestimated. Others have taken up the same theme. Robert Bork, whose nomination to the Supreme Court by President Reagan was vetoed by the Senate in 1987, recently published a book condemning what he calls ‘the world-wide rule of judges’.
default Mar
defaultk Levin, likewise, has written a study entitled 
defaultMen in Black: How the Supreme Court is Destroying America
default. And Jeremy Waldron, a New Zealander now based in New York, maintains the same line.
default Some legal academics are less sweeping in their condemnation, bu
defaultt in the lead-up to the not unexpected death of Chief Justice Rehnquist in 2005, and in the commentaries on the appointment of John Roberts as his successor, there have been numerous negative assessments of how little the US Supreme Court has contributed t
defaulto constitutionalism in recent times.
default Its somewhat half-hearted efforts to control the American government’s excesses during the current ‘war on terror’ are, to many, 
defaultsymptomatic of the malaise.
default If the UK’s judges are failing to rise to constitutional cha
defaultllenges, it seems that American judges, despite having a much greater tradition in the field, and more ‘weapons’ at their disposal, are also in need of strong encouragement to be more active.           
defaultIn America the review of the constitutionality of pri
defaultmary legislation can occur only 
defaultafter
default it has been enacted. In France it can occur only 
defaultbeforehand
default. The Constitution of the Fifth Republic, in place since 1958, created a body known as the Constitutional Council (
defaultLe Conseil constitutionnel
default).
default This body is n
defaultot actually a court at all and its nine members are not judges, but one of its functions is to examine draft statutes (
defaultlois
default) to see if they conform with the Constitution. The Councillors do not read or listen to arguments put by advocates for the opposing 
defaultpoints of view. They do their own thinking, taking account only of documents preceding the draft law and of the French Constitution itself. But they have been adept at reading into that Constitution additional criteria for assessing whether laws are in con
defaultformity with it. 
defaultThe turning point came in 1971. A year earlier the French Cabinet had ordered the dissolution of a small left-wing political party, 
defaultLa Gauche Prolétarienne
default. In response to this, activists such as Jean-Paul Sartre and Simone de Beauvoir se
defaultt up another group named after the newspaper of the banned party, 
defaultLa Cause du Peuple
default. The government directed the local prefect not to register this new group but a local administrative court rather bravely ruled that the prefect had no such power to refus
defaulte registration. The government then introduced a Bill to widen the prefect’s powers and it was this Bill which the Constitutional Council struck down. It did so by implying into the Constitution the so-called ‘fundamental principles recognised by the laws 
defaultof the Republic’, a phrase mentioned in the Preamble to the 1946 Constitution of the Fourth French Republic and deemed to be affirmed by the Preamble to the 1958 Constitution.
default One of these principles, said the Council, was that of freedom of association. 
defaultAnd it is on the back of that momentous decision that the Constitutional Council has since built an envious reputation for guaranteeing civil liberties in France. Last year the Council pronounced on 18 draft laws. This year it has already invalidated parts
default of the proposed anti-terrorism law,
default although it upheld the controversial youth employment law, which was found not to be in breach of the principle of equality.
default Of course, political and popular pressure later conspired to force President Chirac to suspe
defaultnd that law, a move which prompted a recent commentator to suggest that the ritual of mass protests reversing 
defaultunpopular governmental measures should actually be regarded as an informal part of the French constitution.
default 
defaultThe French Council has another impor
defaulttant function – the supervision of elections. That responsibility also fell to the US Supreme Court when Al Gore challenged the electoral victory of George W Bush in 2000. The Court split 5 to 4 in favour of not permitting any further recounting of the vot
defaultes in Florida, thereby handing the presidency to Mr Bush.
default Analysts usually observe that there was an uncanny alignment between the supposed political views of the nine US justices and the ultimate outcome of the case, but whether any of the judges actuall
defaulty allowed their personal political predilections to influence their voting is impossible to verify. Their political predilections could have been the 
defaultresult
default of, rather than the 
defaultcause
default of, their conception of the role of judges in developing the constitution
default. Adam Tomkins would probably condemn this case as another lamentable example of unhelpful judicial interference in constitutional affairs, but if so he would also have to condemn the involvement of the highest civil court in Italy
default when, earlier this year
default, it confirmed the electoral victory of Romano Prodi. As we know from the experience of Germany last year and Iraq this year, courts may not be able to force politicians into coalitions, but they can at least determine who won most votes at an election. If
default a top court is not the right body to decide that, who is?  And, by the way, according to opinion polls, the reputation of the American Supreme Court hardly suffered at all as a result of its intervention in 
defaultBush v Gore
default.
defaultThe American Court has also been a
defaultctive in developing ‘unenumerated’ constitutional rights – rights which are not expressly mentioned in the Constitution, but which judges see as implicit. But we do not need to cross the Atlantic, or even the English Channel, to encounter judges who are pr
defaultepared to invent such rights. Just down the road is a jurisdiction where the Supreme Court has been remarkably active in doing just that.  Ireland even allows its judges to assess the constitutionality of legislation 
defaulteither before or after
default its enactment.
default 
defaultOne of the unenumerated rights in Ireland is the right to privacy. The others include the right to strike, the right to earn a living, the right to communicate, the right to access the courts, the right to 
defaultbe legally represented if facing criminal charges,
default the right to protection of one’s health, the right to travel, the right to found a family and the right to know the identity of one’s natural mother. All of these rights are creations of the common law.
default Not everyone is a fan of how the Irish judges have 
defaultgone about their task – David Gwynn Morgan at Cork (I think he goes with full title, i.e. David Gwynn Morgan), for example, is critical of their inconsistency and of their reliance on principles which to him are not rational.
default Furthermore, in the last few 
defaultyears a marked conservatism has become evident within the Irish Supreme Court.
default Worrying examples are the case of Jamie Sinnott, a young autistic man who was, in effect, denied the right to education,
default and the case of 
defaultTD
default,
default where only one judge, Mrs Justice
default Denham, was bold enough to order the government to provide support units for teenagers with behavioural difficulties – the other judges saw that as a step too far for the judiciary, a step that would breach the doctrine of separation of powers by allowing
default judges to do what was supposedly the preserve of Dáil Éireann.  
defaultIn this respect the Irish Supreme Court has not followed the lead of the Supreme Court of India, which has come under attack not for being judicially 
defaultinactive
default but for being judicially 
defaultover-a
defaultctive
default. It has been particularly imaginative in developing the right to life and personal liberty, which is guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution of 1950 but which, thanks to the Supreme Court, now embraces as well the right to shelter, the ri
defaultght to health, the right to work, the right to clean air and clean water and the right to information. In a recent case brought by a journalist, the Indian Supreme Court relied on the right to equality in Article 14 of the Constitution to order criminal ju
defaultstice agencies to investigate the alleged financing of terrorist organisations by high-ranking politicians.
default This prompted one critic to remark that what was formerly judicial activism had evolved into judicial arrogance
default and he warned that unless the Supr
defaulteme Court exercises restraint, ‘the activist profile may be the first footprints of an impending constitutional lawlessness in India’.
default       
defaultWell, maybe the Indian court 
defaulthas
default gone too far, and maybe the Irish court 
defaultis
default wise to be cautious. But in the UK ju
defaultdges are a long way from reaching those outer limits of constitutional activism. And they have far to go before coming anywhere near the role played by the Constitutional Court of South Africa or, in recent years, by the Supreme Court of Canada, although t
defaulthose courts do benefit from having very modern constitutional documents from which to work. It was apparent from its earliest judgments in the mid-1990s
default that the 
defaultSouth African Court was going to be one which grounded its decisions in a purposive interpret
defaultation of the country’s Constitution, which came to its conclusions only after considering how courts in other parts of the world – and not just courts based on the Anglo-Saxon model – had resolved similar issues, and which contained judges who couched thei
defaultr judgments not in vapid legal jargon but in inspirational phrases.
default The Court has also been refreshingly pragmatic, best illustrated perhaps in its use of the power to suspend the invalidation of legislation until the government has had a reasonable time 
defaultto amend it.
default This is a power which the Federal Constitutional Court of Germany has also conferred upon itself.
default And the South African Court has pronounced at length on the scope of social and economic rights, yet without usurping the mandate of elected po
defaultliticians in that domain.
default 
defaultCanada, too, has benefited from having a Supreme Court that is imaginative and internationalist in its outlook, although in the view of one commentator, there is ‘no set of judges in the developed world who are treated by the 
defaultgeneral population with such glowering suspicion’.
default My colleague Rory O’Connell has made a special study of the ‘political’ role of the court
default and is currently analysing how it has innovatively developed the concept of equality. The leading Canadian schola
defaultr in this field, Kent Roach, has shown in his book 
defaultThe Supreme Court on Trial
default, that ‘an independent and courageous judiciary is the best institution we have to remind us of’ the effects of our actions on the unpopular and the disadvantaged.
default One of the num
defaulterous decisions Roach highlights
default is that here the Supreme Court read into the human rights code of Alberta the right not be discriminated against on the basis of sexual orientation, even though the legislature had deliberately omitted that right.
default  
defaultSo, a
defaultll over the world top courts have deployed considerable imagination in developing their national constitutions. And frequently they have achieved this without relying upon the specific wording of their constitution. New Zealand, like Britain, does not have
default a written constitution, but that has not stopped the highest court there from ruling that people should be compensated if their fundamental human rights are breached.
default It is worth remembering, too, that 
defaultinternational
default courts play an ever more important rol
defaulte in promoting constitutionalism. Some would say that the European Court of Justice, like the Indian Supreme Court, has been a little 
defaulttoo
default enthusiastic in doing just that.
default Steven Greer, at Bristol, argues that the European Court of Human Rights has devised
default both primary and secondary constitutional principles to guide its own adjudication processes.
default Certainly that Court has judged important constitutional issues arising within Britain. It has ruled that it is not contrary to basic democratic principles to a
defaultllow members of Parliament to be immune from being sued for whatever they say in Parliament.
default It has also insisted, in a case that came from Guernsey, that judicial power must be wielded completely separately from executive or legislative power,
default a decisio
defaultn which prompted the British Lord Chancellor to announce that he would no longer sit as a judge. And in what seems to me a less impressive decision, the European Court upheld the quaint rule that no-one can sit in the British Parliament unless he or she is
default prepared to swear 
defaultpersonal
default allegiance to the Queen.
default That, surely, must be an aberration? 
defaultSuggestions for how judges should reform the UK constitutiondefault&#xa0;
defaultSo courts elsewhere have managed to develop constitutions quite significantly. This final section of t
defaulthe article makes a number of suggestions as to how UK judges should amend the British constitution – without the need for Parliamentary or governmental approval. These changes would create a more ‘constitutionalised’ state, meaning that the distribution an
defaultd 
defaultexercise of power would be controlled in a more consistent and principled fashion and that people would be left with a greater sense of being citizens of the world rather than of one small corner of it, Within the last century British judges have been un
defaultnecessarily timid in the constitutional field.
default The time has come for them to be more assertive.
default 
defaultFirst, British judges should resurrect and develop the concept of ‘constitutional rights’. A few judges did flirt with this idea in pre-Human Rights Act days
default, in cases like 
defaultLeech
default, 
defaultWitham
default and 
defaultSimms
default.
default Now that that Act has embedded most of the Convention rights in our domestic law the time seems to me to be riper than ever for the enunciation of rights unenumerated in that Act. Such a position is supported by at
default least two former Law Lords,
default and also by the Cambridge scholar Mark Elliott.
default Unfortunately, as I tried to indicate in the memorial lecture for Stephen Livingstone earlier this year,
default Britain’s Law Lords have been unwilling to go beyond Convention rights 
defaultby affirming the existence of additional rights under the common law. In particular they failed to do so in the Northern Irish case of 
defaultCullen
default,
default where a person held in custody was, in defiance of the rules, denied access to a solicitor at certain times. By 
default3 to 2 (with Lords Bingham and Steyn dissenting) the Lords refused to award any compensation for this breach of rights. Very regrettably, just a month ago the House set its face more firmly than ever against the idea of developing the concept of constituti
defaultonal rights: in 
defaultWatkins v Home Office
default 
defaultthey held that if prison officers maliciously interfere with a prisoner’s correspondence with his solicitor, they will not be liable to pay compensation if no actual loss has been suffered by the prisoner. Lord Bingha
defaultm seemed to go back on what he 
defaultsaid in 
defaultCullen
default and joined Lord Rodger in claiming that the fact that the Human Rights Act was now in force was a further reason for 
defaultnot
default developing the concept of constitutional rights. With respect, I think that is misguided.
default There is surely much more to rights under the constitution than the concept of human rights? In my view the three key constitutional rights which judges should immediately develop and provide compensation for if breached are the right to access to justic
defaulte,
default the right to equality
default and the right to fairness in decision-making.
default     
defaultMy second suggested reform is that judges should develop the idea of positive state duties as the corollary of constitutional rights. They should steal a march on their Strasbou
defaultrg colleagues in this regard, for the latter have been a bit hesitant in fashioning duties out of Articles in the European Convention.
default To some extent British judges have already developed positive duties based on Article 2,
default but there is a lot more they c
defaultould do vis-à-vis, say, Articles 3 and 8. For instance, if women have the right not to be subjected to domestic violence, should the state not be under a duty to provide refuges and other support facilities for abused women? And if we all have the right to
default be free from degrading treatment and personally secure, should judges not oblige the state to protect us against environmental degradation? The Indian Supreme Court has been severely criticised for inappropriate meddling in environmental issues,
default but in B
defaultritain the courts have been almost completely silent in the area. 
default Thirdly, judges should assert more forcefully their power to review the exercise of Crown prerogatives. There is no need to follow Tomkins in calling for a Prerogative (Abolition) Act.
default Th
defaulte decision in the 
defaultGCHQ
default case, back in 1984,
default was clearly a missed opportunity to subject the government more meaningfully to the rule of law. Although the European Court of Human Rights agreed that considerations of national security justified the British g
defaultovernment’s ban on trade unions at the site in question,
default the House of Lords could surely have been more interventionist in assessing the strength of the government’s claim. True, 
defaultlater cases have shown that the courts are sometimes willing to intervene on other prerogative powers, such as the power to issue pas
defaultsports,
default to grant pardons
default or to to render diplomatic assistance to a British subject who is suffering violation of a fundamental human right as the result of the conduct of the authorities of a foreign state.
default Given recent controversies over peerages for 
defaultdonors of money, maybe judges will soon get the opportunity to decide whether certain honours have been legally bestowed. And it is not inconceivable that the lawfulness of resort to foreign military action will soon or later be justiciable, whether or not
default Parliamentary approval is also required.
default  But Britain still awaits its equivalent to the Watergate case in America.
default There the Supreme Court recognised that the President does have the right to keep many conversations confidential, but it nevertheless he
defaultld that the duty to ensure fairness in a criminal trial overrides that privilege. Richard Nixon resigned as President two weeks after the Supreme Court’s decision.
default The closest Britain has come to this degree of scrutiny of executive privilege was probably
default during the recent Hutton Inquiry into the death of David Kelly.
default The outcome of that inquiry is for present purposes irrelevant, but what 
defaultis
default worth noting is the irony that a Law Lord who was not presiding in a court and who could not make any judgment as 
defaultto civil or criminal liability was nevertheless supplied with more information than he would have been given if he had been so presiding – he even got to see Alastair Campbell’s private diary! 
defaultMy fourth suggestion is that the doctrine which allows foreign
default governments to claim sovereign immunity when sued in the United Kingdom needs to be restricted. The primacy of customary international law should be recognised. For example, people who are the victims of state-sponsored torture abroad should be able to su
defaulte the foreign governments in British courts
default and, if they win, they should be able to enforce the judgment against the foreign government’s assets in this country. As it happens, an appeal dealing with this point has just concluded in the House of Lords.
default 
defaultWhen they are writing their judgments let’s hope the Law Lords in that case make as good a use of international law as they did in the two Belmarsh cases
default and in the Pinochet case some years ago.
default  
defaultFifthly, as I argued in the Livingstone lecture,
default judges 
defaultshould put a severe dent in the constitutional principle that international treaties ratified by the government have no effect 
defaultwithin our national legal system unless they have been expressly incorporated into our law.
default In the Northern Irish case of 
defaultMcKerr
default case, two years ago,
default Lord Steyn called for this dualist approach to international law to be reconsidered. A majority of judges in the High Court of Australia came to the same conclusion nearly 10 years before that,
default though it is fair to say that the idea
default has not since taken root there and, apart from its work on the rights of indigenous peoples,
default the Australian Court has a record that is probably worse than that of the House of Lords in implying constitutional rights.
default Of course allowing treaties to have 
defaultan 
defaulteffect 
defaultdoes not mean that they have to become 
defaultbinding
default: judges should develop a rebuttable presumption that national law 
defaultmust 
defaultbe read in a way which makes it consistent with ratified treaties unless there are very strong policy reasons why an inconsisten
defaultcy should be preserved. This would go further than the principle of statutory construction which is currently applied, namely, that statutes are to be read as consistent with ratified treaties only if they are reasonably capable of bearing such a meaning.
defaultSixthly, judges should expand still further the sources they are prepared to look at before they decide cases. At present they very largely restrict themselves to ‘legal’ sources, ignoring information which is primarily economic or sociological in nature.
default They should, in short, accept American-style ‘Brandeis briefs’.
default Provided limits are placed on the size of such documents, and that resort to oral argument is more time-limited, as it is in the Washington and Strasbourg courts, there is no reason to belie
defaultve that proceedings in British courts would be unduly lengthened as a result of this reform.   
defaultSeventhly, and this links to the point just made, judges need to commit themselves to a much more contextual approach to statutory interpretation, one that goes
default beyond the requirement in section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998 that legislation must be read and given effect in a way which is compatible with Convention rights ‘so far as it is possible to do so’.
default An archetypal example of this 
defaultnot
default happening is the re
defaultcent case of 
defaultR v J
default,
default where a man in his thirties who had allegedly had repeated sex with a 13-year-old girl was charged with indecent assault on a woman, contrary to section 14 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956. He was not charged with having unlawful interc
defaultourse with a girl under 16, contrary to section 6, because a prosecution for that offence had to be brought within 12 months and this one had not 
defaultbeen.
default The four male Law Lords allowed the defendant’s appeal against conviction, on the basis that Parliament
default could have had no possible purpose in prohibiting a prosecution under section 6 after the lapse of 12 months if exactly the same conduct could then be prosecuted under section 14.
default Lord Bingham said that any other result was ‘impossible’ and Lord Steyn th
defaultought the conclusion was ‘inescapable’. Yet Lady Hale, who is so far the only woman to have been appointed to our top court, strongly dissented. For her the only unfairness in the case was that being done by her fellow judges to the young girl and the many
default like her.
default Lady Hale said the Sexual Offences Act was a mess when it was enacted and was an ever greater mess when it was amended. It simply was not possible to discern within it a Parliamentary intention along the lines suggested by her brethren. As she 
defaultput it: ‘Although we do have to try to make sense of the words Parliament has used, we do not have to supply Parliament with the thinking that it never did and the words that it never used.’
default I fervently hope that Lady Hale’s approach to statutory interpre
defaulttation is the one that begins to prevail. As we all know, context is everything.
defaultMy eighth point is that senior judges should begin to exercise the power to overrule precedents for the future only. At present, when they overrule a precedent, one of the par
defaultties to the case at hand bears the consequences of the change to the law, even though that party might have thought the ‘old’ law was perfectly good and had based his or her conduct on it. Prospective overruling avoids this sense of injustice, allowing the
default case at hand to be decided in accordance with the pre-existing law but sending out a message to future litigants that for them the law has changed. The Federal Constitutional Court of Germany has given itself this power, where practical reasons demand it.
default Seven Law Lords asserted it for themselves in the 
defaultSpectrum Plus 
defaultcase last year, but they opted not to make use of it on the facts before them.
default There seems to me to be particular scope for prospective overruling in criminal cases, where it is surely unju
defaultst that a defendant can find him- or herself punished for falling foul of a new interpretation of the law that did not exist at the time the alleged crime was committed.
defaultNinthly, judges should be prepared to consider abstract legal questions, the so-calle
defaultd 
defaultactio popularis
default. They are edging towards doing this, as is evident from cases such as the one taken by 
defaultThe Guardian
default against the statutory ban on campaigning to abolish the monarchy
default or the 
defaultone brought by the Family Planning Association here in Belfast ag
defaultainst the uncertainty inherent in our abortion laws.
default If judges did a lot more of this kind of judging they would help to clarify legal principles and in the process greatly enhance the rule of law. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFinally, and most radically, our top judges should 
defaultclaim for themselves the power to declare Acts of Parliament to be unconstitutional. We should never forget that the doctrine of Parliamentary sovereignty, which supposedly lies at the base of our constitution, is itself a construct of the common law.
default The
default current Attorney General, Lord Goldsmith, expressly stated this in an answer to a Parliamentary question asked by Lord Lester of Herne Hill two years ago.
default Judges can therefore, if so inclined, modify the doctrine. This is what the Law Lords were invited 
defaultto do last year when there was a challenge by the Countryside Alliance to the constitutionality of the Hunting Act 2004, passed by the House of Commons without the consent of the second Chamber.
default While all nine Law Lords held the Act to be valid, because i
defaultt was passed in accordance with the Parliament Act of 1949, which in turn had been passed in accordance with the Parliament Act of 1911, five Law Lords expressly stated
default that if the House of Commons alone were to try to delete from the 1911 Act the section
default which prevents it from extending the maximum permitted life of a Parliament beyond five years, that would 
defaultnot
default be a constitutional Act. Lord Steyn went further, suggesting that courts should be able to invalidate Acts which seek to abolish any fundamental 
defaultfeature of our constitution, such as the right of access to judicial review.
default 
defaultIn 2004, when the government was pushing another of its Asylum and Immigration Bills through Parliament, it inserted a provision
default which would have ousted the jurisdiction of the
default courts to hear challenges against decisions of the immigration appeal tribunals. There was a huge outcry, not least from Lord Woolf, the Lord Chief Justice.
default Eventually the clause was dropped. But if Parliament had gone ahead and enacted it, would courts 
defaulthave held it to be unconstitutional? I very much hope so. Similarly, if in April 2006 the government had not climbed down on its Legislative and Regulatory Reform Bill, under which ministers could have done all sorts of things that only an elected Parliame
defaultnt should be able to do, I like to 
defaultthink that, had a challenge been raised in the courts against a government measure taken under the Act, judges would have declared it too to be unconstitutional. As Gibbon noted in 
defaultThe Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire
default, published around the same time as the American Constitution: ‘The principles of a free constitution are irrecoverably lost, when the legislative power is nominated by the executive’.
default Or, as the US Supreme Court put it in 1966, ‘Where rights secured by t
defaulthe Constitution are involved, there can be no rule making or legislation which would abrogate them’.
default  
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default* Professor of International and Comparat
defaultive Law, Queen’s University Belfast. This is a version of my inaugural lecture, which was delivered under the same title at Queen’s University Belfast on 27 April 2006. Although the overall thrust and main recommendations of the lecture have been maintaine
defaultd, there has been some slight restructuring and alteration of details. I am very grateful for comments made on a draft of the article by Dr Gordon Anthony. Remaining errors are, though, mine alone. I also wish to acknowledge more general indebtedness to Pr
defaultofessor Desmond Greer, who was a wise and steady counsellor during my earlier employment at Queen’s University from 1979 to 1991. I fear this article will not meet Des’s high standards of scholarly rigour, which are legendary, but it is nonetheless dedicat
defaulted to him with admiration and affection.
default Adam Tomkins, 
defaultOur Republican Constitution
default. For reviews see T. R. S. Allan [2006] P.L. 172; Ian Loveland (2006) 122 L.Q.R. 340; Danny Nicol (2006) 69 M.L.R. 280.
default For Dworkin’s latest defence of his position, see 
defaultJustice in Robes
default.
default ‘The Limitation of Human Rights’ [1998] P.L. 62; ‘The Constitution: Morals and Rights’ [1996] P.L. 622; ‘Law and Democracy’ [1995] P.L. 80; ‘Judicial Remedies and the Constitution’ (1994) 57 M.L.R. 213; ‘Is the High Court the Guardian of Fundamental Right
defaults’ [1993] P.L. 59. For John Griffith’s views on these writings, see ‘The Brave New World of Sir John Laws’ (2000) 63 M.L.R. 159.
default 
defaultE.g. Thoburn v Sunderland City Council
default [2002] 3 WLR 247, criticised by Geoffrey Marshall in ‘Metric Martyrs and Martyrdom by 
defaultHenry VIII Clause’ (2002) 118 L.Q.R. 493 but praised by Mark Elliott in ‘Embracing “Constitutional” Legislation: Towards Fundamental Law? (2003) 54 N.I.L.Q. 25. Other prominent judicial advocates of common law constitutionalism include Sedley L.J. (see n. 
default8 below), Lord Woolf (n. 11 below), Lord Steyn (nn. 78, 127 and 129 below) and Lord Cooke (see n. 78 below).
default See, 
defaulte.g.
default, T. R. S. Allan, 
defaultLaw, Liberty and Justice: The Legal Foundations of British Constitutionalism
default and
default Constitutional Justice: A Liberal The
defaultory of the Rule of Law
default.
default 
default 
defaultOur Republican Constitution
default, n. 1 above, p. 20.
default 
default‘In Defence of the Political Constitution’ (2002) 22 O.J.L.S. 157.
default 
default‘The Political Constitution’ (1979) 42 M.L.R. 1. Tomkins discusses this article in 
defaultOur Republican Constitution
default, n. 1 above, at pp. 36-38. See too John Griffith, 
defaultThe Politics of the Judiciary
default, first published in 1977 but now in its 5
defaultth
default edition (1997); ‘The Common Law and the Political Constitution’ (2001) 117 L.Q.R. 42; ‘Judicial Decision-Making in Public Law’ [198
default5] P.L. 564. Also Sir Stephen Sedley, ‘The Sound of Silence: Constitutional Law without a Constitution’ (1994) 110 L.Q.R. 270 and ‘The Common Law and the Political Constitution: A Reply’ (2001) 117 L.Q.R. 68.
default 
defaultPublic Law and Political Theory
default; 
defaultSword and Sc
defaultales: An Examination of the Relationship between Law and Politics
default; 
defaultThe Idea of Public Law
default.
default See, 
defaulte.g.
default, ‘Of Fig Leaves and Fairy Tales: The 
defaultUltra Vires
default Doctrine, the Sovereignty of Parliament and Judicial Review’ (1996) 55 C.L.J. 122.
default ‘Questioning Common
default Law Constitutionalism’ (2005) 25 L.S. 142. See too his ‘Back to the Future? Unearthing the Theory of Common Law Constitutionalism’ (2003) 23 O.J.L.S. 435; and ‘Harnessing the Power of the Past? Lord Hoffmann and the Belmarsh Detainees Case’ (2005) 32 J.L.
defaultS. 534. See also Lord Woolf, ‘Judicial Review – The Tensions Between the Executive and the Judiciary’ (1998) 114 L.Q.R. 579 and ‘European Court of Human Rights on the Occasion of the Opening of the Judicial Year’ [2003] E.H.R.L.R. 257. Danny Nicol (n. 1 ab
defaultove, at p 284) praises Tomkins for ‘swimming against the tide of judicialisation’.
default Thomas Poole, ‘Dogmatic Liberalism? T R S Allan and the Common Law Constitution’ (2002) 65 M.L.R. 463 at 474-5.
default 
defaultConstitutional Rights after Globalization
default. Anderson uses 
defaultthe term ‘rights constitutionalism’ rather than ‘common law constitutionalism’, but there appears to be little difference between them. At p. 4 he certainly favours ‘legal pluralism’ as the explanatory paradigm for constitutionalism: ‘[L]egal pluralism rev
defaulteals the political character of our prevailing definitions of constitutionalism and demonstrates how state-centred accounts prevent us from asking questions of accountability with regard to 
defaultall
default forms of political power’.  
default 
defaultibid.
default p. 146. Anderson’s prefer
defaults to rely on a theory which he calls ‘legal pluralism’.
default Martin Loughlin, 
defaultPublic Law and Political Theory
default, chs. 7 and 8.
default See, especially, 
defaultConstitutional Fundamentals
default.
default See, especially, 
defaultThe English Judges: Their Role in the Changing Constitution
default.
default 
defaultLaw 
defaultand Administration
default (2
defaultnd
default ed, 1997), chs. 2 and 3.
default Anthony Sampson believes it partly lies in Radio Four’s 
defaultToday
default programme: see 
defaultWho Runs This
defaultPlace? The Anatomy of Britain in the 21
defaultst
default Century
default, pp. 222-227. Sedley LJ has argued for ‘bi-polar
defaultsovereignty’: s
defaultee ‘Human Rights: A Twenty-first Century Agenda’ [1995]  P.L. 386, 389.
default I have a lot of empathy with the views expressed by Daniek Farber and Suzanna Sherry in 
defaultDesperately Seeking Certainty: The Misguided Quest for Constitutional Foundations
default.
default 
default Letter t
defaulto Sir Horace Mann, 18-19 January 1770.
default Cf Lord Bingham in ‘The Courts and the Constitution’ (1996-97) 7 King’s College Law Journal 12, reprinted in 
defaultThe Business of Judging: Selected Essays and Speeches
default; pp. 225-238, who said (at p. 237 of the latter): ‘C
defaultonstitutional arrangements, like motor cars, require periodic inspection and overhaul, so that worn-out parts may be renewed and ill-fitting parts adjusted. The fact that a constitution such as ours has been on the road for a very long time makes this atte
defaultntion more necessary, not less’.  
default Especially ‘Courts in a Multi-Layered Constitution’, i
defaultn Nicholas Bamforth and Peter Leyland (eds.), 
defaultPublic Law in a Multi-Layered Constitution
default, ch. 11.
default Gordon Anthony, 
defaultUK Public Law and European Law: The Dynamics of L
defaultegal Integration
default.
default 
default Constitutional Reform Act 2005, ss. 23-60.
default Statement by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Falconer, on 1 March 2006: 
defaultwww.dca.gov.uk/pubs/
defaultstatements/2006/st060301b.htm.
default The Constitutional Reform Act 2005, which creates the Supreme Court, states in s. 1(a) that the Act ‘does not adversely affect the existing constitutional principle of the rule of law’. 
default For a recent journalistic blast at New Labour see Henry Porter, ‘O
defaultnly a constitution can save us from this abuse of power’, 
defaultThe Observer
default, 2 April 2006. 
default Cf 
defaultSecretary of State for the Home Department v MB
default (12 April 2006), where 
defaultSullivan J held that 
defaults. 3(10) of the Prevention of Terrorism Act 2005
default did not give the respondent the fair hearing he was entitled to under the Human Rights Act 1998 because (in the judge’s view) it confined the court to looking only at the one-sid
defaulted material available to the Secretary of State 
defaultat the time the order was made
default. The judge said that the thin veneer of legality which was sought to be applied by 
defaults 3 of the 2005 Act
default could not disguise the reality that the Convention rights of people subjected to control orders were being determined not by an independent court but by executive decision-making untrammelled by any prospect of effective judicial
default supervision. As it was not possible for the court to conclude that the Secretary of State’s decisions were legally flawed upon the basis of the one-sided information then available to him, the control order had to continue in force but s. 3(10) was declar
defaulted to be incompatible with Convention rights.
default 
defaultA v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default [2005] 2 A.C. 68. Lord Bingham’s judgment in this case was to some extent presaged by his Romanes lecture delivered on 15 October 2002 and published as ‘Personal
default Freedom and the Dilemma of Democracies’ (2003) 52 I.C.L.Q. 841.
default 
defaultA v Secretary of State for the Home Department (No. 2)
default [2006] 1 All E.R. 575.
default 
default‘Readings of 
defaultA v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default’ [2005] P.L. 259.
default 
defaultFor a useful comparison of constitutionalism in the UK, the US, France and Germany see Tim Koopmans, 
defaultCourts and Political Institutions
default ; and for  specific information on comparativism in the human rights field see Christopher McCrudden, ‘A Common Law of Hu
defaultman Rights? Transnational Judicial Conversations on Constitutional Rights’ (2000) 20 O.J.L.S. 499.
default 
default(1803) 1 Cranch 137; 5 U.S. 137. See William Nelson, 
defaultMarbury v Madison: The Origins and Legacy of Judicial Review
default, reviewed by 
defaultJ O’Neill, ‘
defaultMarbury v Madiso
defaultn
default at 200: Revisionist Scholarship and the Legitimacy of American Judicial Review’ (2002) 65 M.L.R. 792.
default  
default The Judiciary Act 1789.
default 
defaultSchecter Poultry Corp v United States
default (1935) 295 U.S. 495.
default 
defaultYakus v United States
default (1944) 321 U.S. 414.
default 
defaultCoercing Virtue:
default The World-wide Rule of Judges
default.
default 
defaultSee 
defaulte.g.
default, 
defaultLaw and Disagreement
default.
default 
defaultSee, 
defaulte.g.
default, Herman Schwartz (ed.), 
defaultThe Rehnquist Court
default. For a more generous view see Thomas Keck,
defaultThe Most Activist Supreme Court in History
default, esp Part III (‘The Rehnquist Court and the Spli
defaultntering of
defaultJudicial Conservatism, 1994-2003’).
default But see Tim Otty and Ben Olbourne, ‘The US Supreme Court and the “War on Terror”: 
defaultRasul
default and 
defaultHamdi
default’ [2004] E.H.R.L.R. 558, where the authors say (at p. 569) that in these two decisions the Court underscored i
defaultn the strongest possible fashion the importance of the individual’s right to liberty and affirmed the rule of law. The US Supreme Court’s unwillingness to look abroad for guidance has also been much lamented; see, 
defaulte.g.
default, Cherie Booth and Max du Plessis, ‘Ho
defaultme Alone? The US Supreme Court and International and Transnational Judicial Learning’ [2005] E.H.R.L.R. 127. 
default 
defaultArts. 56-63. For more details see Brice Dickson, 
defaultIntroduction to French Law
default, pp. 52-53 and 85-89.
default 
defaultAlthough technically the Preamble to the 195
default8 Constitution refers only to the human rights and principles of national sovereignty defined by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and confirmed and supplemented by the Preamble to the 1946 Constitution. 
default 
defaultDecision no. 2006-532 D.C. (19 January 20
default06).
default 
defaultDecision no. 2006-535 D.C. (30 March 2006). 
default Robert Tombs in 
defaultThe Times Higher Education Supplement
default, 21 April 2006, p. 17.
default 
defaultBush v Gore
default (2000) 531 U.S. 98. See E J Dionne and William Kristol (eds), 
defaultBush v Gore: The Court Cases and the Commentary
default.
default T
defaulthe 
defaultCorte di Cassazione
default.
default 
defaultJust before the 2000 election an opinion poll suggested that 62% of the American public approved of the way the Supreme Court was handling its job, with only 25% disapproving. Surprisingly, the approval rate amongst Democrats was 10% higher than amongst Re
defaultpublicans [70% to 60%]. Immediately after the Court’s decision in 
defaultBush v Gore
default approval ratings dropped by 3% and disapproval ratings rose by 9%. The approval rate amongst Democrats was now 38% less than amongst Republicans. But a few months later, in June 
default2001, the overall approval and disapproval figures were back to what they had been pre-election and the differential between Democrats and Republicans had been reduced from 38% to 22%. And independent voters were more approving of the Supreme Court than th
defaultey had been prior to the election [59% to 57%]. These statistics are taken from Robert McCloskey (rev. by Sanford Levinson), 
defaultThe American Supreme Court
default (4
defaultth
default ed., 2005), pp. 177-178.
default But not on both occasions. Art. 34.3.3 provides: ‘No Court whatever shal
defaultl have jurisdiction to question the validity of a law, or any provision of a law, the Bill for which shall have been referred to the Supreme Court by the President under Article 26 of this Constitution, or to question the validity of a provision of a law w
defaulthere the corresponding provision in the Bill for such law shall have been referred to the Supreme Court by the President under the said Article 26’. This provision is described by James Casey as a ‘serious disadvantage’: see his 
defaultConstitutional Law in Irela
defaultnd
default (3
defaultrd
default ed., 2000), at p. 338.
default 
defaultJames Casey, 
defaultibid.
default, pp. 394-433.
default 
default‘Judicial Activism – Too Much of a Good Thing’ in Tim Murphy and Patrick Twomey (eds.), 
defaultIreland’s Evolving Constitution, 1937-97: Collected Essays
default, ch. 9.
default I wish to acknowledge assistanc
defaulte provided by Rossa Fanning of U.C.D. in this area.
default 
defaultSinnott v Minister for Education
default [2001] 2 I.R. 545.
default 
defaultTD v Minister for Education
default [2001] 4 I.R. 259.
default 
defaultVineet Narain v Union of India
default [1998] A.I.R. S.C. 889.
default Shubhankar Dam, ‘
defaultVineet Narain v Union of 
defaultIndia
default: “A Court of Law and not Justice” – Is the Indian Supreme Court beyond the Indian Constitution?’ [2005] P.L. 239 at p. 247.
default 
defaultibid
default. p. 241. For a less worried perspective see S.P. Sathe, 
defaultJudicial Activism in India: Transgressing Borders and Enforcing
default Limits
default. 
default ‘Protecting Human Rights Through a Constitutional Court: The Case of South Africa’ (1997) 66 Fordham Law Review 531. The Court heard its first case in 1995.
default 
defaultArthur Chaskalson and Albie Sachs have been particularly to the fore in this regard.
default S. 172(1) of the Constitution of South Africa 1996 (formerly s. 98(5) of the Interim Constitution 1994): ‘When deciding a constitutional matter within its power, a court (a) must declare that any law or conduct that is inconsistent with the Constitution 
defaultis invalid to the extent of its inconsistency; and (b) may make any order that is just and equitable, including (i)
default&#xad;
default an order limiting the retrospective effect of the declaration of invalidity; and (ii) an order suspending the declaration of invalidity for
default any period and on any conditions, to allow the competent authority to correct the defect’. The power to suspend a declaration of invalidity was first exercised in 
defaultS v Ntuli
default 1996 (1) S.A.L.R. 1207, where the government was given some 16 months to produce c
defaultorrective legislation. This deadline was later extended but ultimately the Constitutional Court held that the Minister’s officials had failed to act promptly and diligently and that the order of invalidity must therefore stand: 
defaultMinister of Justice v Ntuli
default 
default(5 June 1997).
default Lars Mammen, ‘A Short Note on the German Federal Constitutional Court and its Power to Review Legislation’ [2001] E.H.R.L.R. 433.
default Most notably in 
defaultRepublic of South Africa v Grootboom
default 2000 (1) S.A. 46. See also Ivan Hare, ‘
defaultMinister of 
defaultHealth v Treatment Action Campaign
default: The South African AIDS Pandemic and the Right to Healthcare’ [2002] E.H.R.L.R. 624.
default M A Sanderson, reviewing K. Roach, 
defaultThe Supreme Court on Trial
default (2003) 52 I.C.L.Q. 542 at 543.
default 
defaultLegal Theory in the Crucible of Constitutional Justice: A Study of Judges and Political Morality in Canada, Ireland and Italy
default.
default Preface, p. ix.
default 
defaultibid
default. pp. 195-6. See too 
defaultM v H
default [1999] 2 S.C.R. 3, where the Court held that the exclusion of same-sex common law partnerships from the support provisions in Ontario’s Family Law Act 1990 was unjustified discrimination against gays and lesbians. That case was cited to the Law Lords
default, although not relied upon in their judgments, in 
defaultGhaidan v Godin-Mendoza 
default[2004] 2 A.C. 557.
default 
defaultVriend v Alberta
default 
default(1998) 156 D.L.R. 4
defaultth
default 385. 
default 
defaultSee 
defaultSimpson v Attorney-General
default [1994] 3 N.Z.L.R. 667. Appeals against the New Zealand Court of Appeal used to go to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in London. From 2004 they have gone to the new Supreme Court of New Zealand: see the Supreme Court Act 2003 (N.Z.).
default H. Rasmu
defaultssen, 
defaultOn Law and Policy in the European Court of Justice: A Comparative Study in Judicial Lawmaking
default.
default 
defaultFor a more recent playing out of the debate see T. Hartley, ‘The European Court, Judicial Objectivity and the Constitution of the European Union’ (1996) 11
default2 L.Q.R. 95; A. Arnull, ‘The European Court and Judicial Objectivity: A Reply to Professor Hartley’ (1996) 112 L.Q.R. 411; and T. Tridimas, ‘The Court of Justice and Judicial Activism’ (1996) 21 E.L.Rev. 199. More generally see Miguel Poiares Maduro, 
defaultWe th
defaulte Court: The European Court of Justice and the European Economic Constitution
default.   
default ‘Constitutionalizing Adjudication under the European Convention on Human Rights’ (2003) 23 O.J.L.S. 405. See too A McHarg, ‘Reconciling Human Rights and the Public Interest
default: Conceptual Problems and Doctrinal Uncertainty in the Jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights’ (1999) 62 M.L.R. 671. 
defaultThe European Court will become even more of a constitutional body once the reforms envisaged by Protocol 14 to the European Co
defaultnvention kick in, a development which will delight the current Swiss President, Judge Wildhaber.
default See Luzius Wildhaber, ‘A constitutional future for the European Court of Human Rights?’ (2002) 23 H.R.L.J. 161. More generally see Steven Greer, ‘Protocol 14 a
defaultnd the Future of the European Court of Human Rights’ [2005] P.L. 83.
default U
defaultnless they exploit their position so as to gain an advantage over a personal adversary: compare 
defaultA v UK
default (2002) 36 E.H.R.R. 917 with 
defaultCordova v Italy
default (App Nos 40877/98 and 45649/99; 30 Ja
defaultnuary 2003).
default 
defaultMcGonnell v UK
default (2000) 30 E.H.R.R. 289.
default 
defaultMcGuinness v UK
default (App. 39511/98; decision of 8 June 1999). Cf. 
defaultBuscarini v San Marino
default (2000) 30 E.H.R.R. 208.
default See, generally, I. Harden and N. Lewis, 
defaultThe Noble Lie: The British Constitution and the R
defaultule of Law
default. The claim that judges have been too timid in the specific field of judicial review is a different (and less defensible) claim; see, 
defaulte.g.
default, the comments by Lord Bingham in relation to Will Hutton’s criticism of the judges’ timidity, in ‘The Court
defaults and the Constitution’, n. 22 above, pp. 231-4. 
default At the end of her piece on the House of Lords’ decision in the Northern Irish case of 
defaultRobinson v Secretary of State for Northern Ireland
default [2002] N.I. 390, Brigid Hadfield proclaims that ‘Judicial reserve o
defaultr caution is justified no longer’: ‘Does the Devolved Northern Ireland Need an Independent Judicial Arbiter?’ in 
defaultNicholas Bamforth and Peter Leyland (eds.), 
defaultPublic Law in a Multi-Layered Constitution
default, ch. 6, at p. 156.
default 
defaultE.g.
default 
defaultR v Secretary of State for the
default Home Department, ex parte Leech
default [1994] Q.B. 198; 
defaultR v Lord Chancellor, Ex parte Witham
default [1997] 1 W.L.R. 104; 
defaultR v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Pierson
default [1998] A.C. 539; 
defaultR v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Simms
default [20
default00] 2 A.C. 115 at 131 (per Lord Hoffmann, who spoke of ‘fundamental principles of human rights’); 
defaultR (Daly) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default [2001] 2 A.C. 532;
default R (ProLife Alliance) v BBC
default [2002] 2 All E.R. 756 at 773 (per Laws L.J.); 
defaultCullen v Chi
defaultef Constable of the RUC
default [2003] 1 W.L.R. 1763, where Lord Millett described the right of access to a solicitor as a ‘quasi-constitutional right’. See generally J. Jowell, ‘Beyond the Rule of Law: Towards Constitutional Judicial Review’ [2000] P.L. 671 and D
defaultavid Feldman (ed.), 
defaultEnglish Public Law
default  pp. 345-6.
default Lord Steyn, ‘Democracy Through Law’ [2002] E.H.R.L.R. 723, where he states (at p. 731): ‘The importance of the development of constitutional rights has not come to an end with the advent of the Human Rig
defaulthts Act’ and concludes (at p. 734) that England, though inching towards it, cannot yet be described as a constitutional state. Also Lord Cooke, ‘The Road Ahead for the Common Law’ (2004) 53 I.C.L.Q. 273, where he asserts (at p. 278): ‘…in a liberal democra
defaultcy there must be a bottom line of minority rights, certainly sometimes difficult to define, which cannot be crossed without a legal revolution. The legislative and judicial functions are complementary; the supremacism of either has no place’. See too Lord 
defaultCook’s Hamlyn Lectures for 1996, 
defaultTurning Points of the Common Law
default. Before being appointed a peer, Lord Cooke was President of New Zealand’s Court of Appeal. He sat occasionally in the Appellate Committee of the House of Lords not as a Lord of Appeal but as
default a peer who had previously held high judicial office.
default ‘Embracing “Constitutional” Legislation: Towards Fundamental Law?’ (2003) 54 N.I.L.Q. 25. See n. 4 above.
default 
defaultSafe in Their Hands? The Law Lords and Human Rights
default (2006) 26 L.S. (forthcoming).
default 
defaultCullen v
default Chief Constable of the RUC
default [2003] 1 W.L.R. 1763.
default [2006] 2 All E.R. 353.
default Our law already allows exemplary damages to be awarded when there has been oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action by servants of the government: see 
defaultKuddus v Chief Const
defaultable of Leicestershire Constabulary
default [2002] 2 A.C. 122.
default A starting point could be 
defaultR v Lord Chancellor, ex parte Witham
default [1997] 2 All E.R. 778.
default 
defaultMaybe a seed has been sown in 
defaultA v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default [2005] 2 A.
defaultC. 68. S
defaultee Sandra Fredm
defaultan, ‘From Deference to Democracy: The Role of Equality under the Human Rights Act 1998’ (2006) 122 L.Q.R. 53.
default 
defaultSee, most recently, 
defaultR (Smith) v Parole Board
default [2005] 1 W.L.R. 350 and, on the idea of ‘good administration’, 
defaultR (Nadarajah) v Home Secretary
default [2005
default] EWCA Civ 1363.
default Alastair Mowbray, 
defaultThe Development of Positive Obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights by the European Court of Human Rights
default.
default 
default 
default 
defaultR (Amin) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default [2004] 1 A.C. 653; 
defaultR (Middleton) v 
defaultWest Somerset Coroner
default [2004] 2 All E.R. 465; 
defaultR (Sacker) v West Yorkshire Coroner
default [2004] 2 A.C. 182; 
defaultR (Takoushis) v HM Coroner for Inner North London
default [2005] EWC Civ 1440; 
defaultR (D) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
default [2006] EWCA Civ 143.
default Shubhankar 
defaultDam, ‘Polluting Environment, Polluting Constitution: Is a “Polluted” Constitution Worse than a Polluted Environment?’ (2005) 17 J. Envtl. L. 383.
default 
defaultOur Republican Constitution
default, p. 133. 
default 
defaultCouncil of Civil Service Unions v Minister for the Civil Service
default [19
default85] 1 A.C. 374. 
default 
defaultCouncil of Civil Service Unions v UK
default (1987) 50 D.R. 228.
default 
defaultR v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, ex parte Everett
default [1989] 1 All E.R. 655.
default 
defaultR v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex parte Bentley
default [1993] 4 A
defaultll E.R. 443.
default 
defaultR (Abbasi) v Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
default [2002] EWCA Civ 1598. 
default The Armed Forces (Parliamentary Approval for Participation in Armed Conflict) Bill – a private member’s measure – is currently before Parliament.
default 
defaultUS v Nixon
default (1974) 418 U.S. 683.
default 
defaultThe court announced its decision on 24 July 1974; the President resigned on 8 August 1974.
default www.the-hutton-inquiry.org.uk.
default Contrary to the outcome in 
defaultAl-Adsani v Kuwait
default (1996) 107 I.L.R. 536.
default 
defaultJ
defaultones v Ministry of the 
defaultInterior of Saudi Arabia
default. For the Court of Appeal decision see [2004] EWCA Civ 1394.
default See nn. 30 and 31 above.
default 
defaultR v Bow Street Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte Pinochet Ugarte (No. 3) 
default[2000] 1 A.C. 147.
default See n. 80 above. 
default This is the so-called principle of dualism. It was approved by the House of Lords in what is known as The International Tin Council case, 
defaulti.e.
default, 
defaultJ H Rayner (Mincing Lane) Limited v Department of Trade and Industry
default [1990] 2 A.C. 418.
default [2004] 1 A.C. 807.
default 
defaultMinister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Teoh
default (1995) 183 C.L.R. 273.
default Notably in 
defaultMabo v Queensland (No 2)
default (1992) 175 C.L.R. 1. See, generally, Haig Patalan, 
defaultJudging Democracy: The New Politics of the High Court of Australia
default, ch. 5.
default David Kinley (ed
default.), 
defaultHuman Rights in Australian Law
default, pp. 36-43 and Patalan, n. 108 above, ch. 3. But, unlike the House of Lords, the High Court retains the jurisdiction to declare Acts to be unconstitutional.
default 
defaultGarland v British Rail Engineering Ltd
default [1983] 2 A.C. 751. See 
defaultthe discussion in Murray Hunt, 
defaultUsing Human Rights Law in English Courts
default, pp. 76-88.
default 
defaultLouis Brandeis (later a justice of the US Supreme Court) first submitted a collection of medical and sociological evidence in 
defaultMuller v Oregon
default (1908) 208 U.S. 412. 
default S. 3
default was used quite imaginatively by the House of Lords in 
defaultR v A
default [2002] 1 A.C. 45 and 
defaultGhaidan v Godin-Mendoza 
default[2004] 2 A.C. 557.
default [2005] 1 A.C. 562. For comments see [2005] P.L. 193.
default S. 37(2) of, and para. 10(a) of Sch. 2 to, the 1956 Act. The time limit wa
defaults abolished from 1 May 2004 by the Sexual Offences Act 2003. 
default Especially, they added, as the maximum penalty for both offences was the same – 10 years in prison.
default 
defaultibid
default. para. 69.
default ibid
default. para. 89.
default Lars Mammen, ‘A Short Note on the German Federal Constitutional Court and its Power to Review Legislation’ [2001] E.H.R.L.R. 433.
default 
defaultRe Spectrum Plus Ltd
default [2005] 3 W.L.R. 58.
default Art. 7 of the European Convention on Human Rights supposedly prohibits retrospec
defaulttive criminal law, yet the European Court still managed to find no breach of this when the House of Lords upheld the conviction of a man for raping his wife at a time when such behaviour was not thought to be criminal: 
defaultR v R
default [1992] 1 A.C. 599 and 
defaultCR v UK
default (
default1996) 21 E.H.R.R. 363. See, generally, Michael Zander, 
defaultThe Law-Making Process
default (6
defaultth
default ed., 2004), pp. 397-403.
default 
defaultR (Rusbridger) v Attorney-General 
default[2004] 1 A.C. 357. The bar derives from s. 3 of the Treason Act 1848. See too 
defaultR v Secretary of State for the Hom
defaulte Department, ex parte Salem
default [1999] A.C. 450, where the Lords said they had a discretion (not exercised in the case) to hear a point of public law of public interest, notwithstanding that the facts giving rise to the dispute have changed in favour of the p
defaultarty who initiated the proceedings.
default 
defaultRe Family Planning Association for Northern Ireland’s Application
default [200
default5] N.I. 188. See too 
defaultRe E’s Application
default [2003] N.I.J.B. 288.
default See, 
defaulte.g.
default, H.W.R. Wade, ‘The Legal Basis of Sovereignty’ (1955) 13 C.L.J. 172.
default Hans
defaultard (H.L.), 31 March 2004, col. W.A. 160.
default 
defaultR (Jackson) v Attorney General
default [2006] 1 A.C. 262. For a comment see Michael Plaxton, ‘The Concept of Legislation: 
defaultJackson v Her Majesty’s Attorney General
default’ (2006) 69 M.L.R. 249.
default 
defaultLord Nicholls (para. 59), Lord 
defaultSteyn (para. 79), Lord Hope (para. 122), Lady Hale (para. 164) and Lord Carswell (para. 175).
default i
defaultbid
default. para .102 (‘In exceptional circumstances involving an attempt to abolish judicial review or the ordinary role of the courts, the Appellate Committee of th
defaulte House of Lords or a new Supreme Court may have to consider whether this is a constitutional fundamental which even a sovereign Parliament acting at the behest of a complaisant House of Commons cannot abolish’.) For extra-judicial comments by Lord Steyn i
defaultn the area of constitutional law see ‘Democracy Through Law’ [2002] E.H.R.L.R. 723.
default Clause 14.
default And also from Lord Steyn: see ‘Lord Steyn’s Comments from the 
defaultLester and Pannick
default Book Launch’ [2004] J.R. 107.
default 
defaultThe Decline and fall of the Roman Empire
default (17
default76-88), ch. 3.
default 
defaultMiranda v Arizona
default 
default(1966) 384 U.S. 436 at 491.
default