Written evidence submitted by defaultDr John Balldefault (DWB 05)default&#xa0;
defaultThe debate 
defaulton different
default powers over taxation at a sub-state level has moved forward not least because of 
defaulttaxation 
defaultchanges 
defaultin 
defaultother 
defaultdevolved regimes in
default Europe
default,
default 
defaulttogether with
default the 
defaultsuggestion
default of greater taxation powers both for Scotland and Northern Ireland. 
defaultA
defaultt the state level, evidence from the Republic of Ireland
default and central European states ha
defaults
default 
defaultfurther
default 
defaultemphasised the central role of different taxation levels in economic welfare.
defaultMy view is that of an economist concerned at the state of the Welsh economy and the 
defaultway in which
default taxation powers and adjustments can be a useful and innovative tool of 
defaulteconomic 
defaultdevelopment. 
defaultThis submission therefore is not necessarily concerned with the amount of revenue 
defaultwhich
default might accrue to the Assembly (important though that clearly is
default,
default some suggestions 
defaulton revenue 
defaultare made below in section 4
default) but with the usefulness and appropriateness of using (limited) taxation powers as an instrument of economic development.
defaultPreamble:defaultThe principle of different rates of taxation within the UK is already established. Different rates are applied to VAT; individuals pay different rates of personal taxation, council taxes vary by definition upon geography. Both the Scottish Parliament and the Northern Ireland Assembly have powers to vary income tax and the power to vary corporation tax for the latter ha
defaults
default already been suggested. British dependant territories have different taxation rates, not least in rates of corporation tax. 
defaultThe Welsh economy has many structural disadvantages that are beyond the powers suggested by the 
defaultdraft 
defaultbill; 
defaultin reality 
defaultmany of the powers to address these structural disadvantages are already devolved.
default However, the continued decline of the Welsh economy requires the development and use of a variety of appropriate instruments, not least that of taxation, a method that has been successfully used in many economies that have faced similar problems to the Welsh economy.
default Reversing the decline
default of the Welsh economy and 
defaultintroducing growth has to be the over-riding priority of any government initiative whether by the Welsh or UK governments. It is within this context that this memorandum is presented.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is of co
defaulturse accepted that some of the ideas that follow may well be 
defaultseen to be outside the remit of the current suggested legislation. Th
defaultere
default is 
defaulta
defaultn
default argument however for 
defaultpresenting them at
default this highly appropriate moment, especially since the draft bill Section 116B, (1) refers to powers to “…amend so as to specify as a
defaultn
default additional devolved tax, a tax of any description…” and
default(2) “…
defaultmake any other modifications of the provisions relating to devolved taxes…”
default&#xa0;
defaultThe memorandum is presented in four sections –
default&#xa0;default1. defaultIncome Taxdefault.
defaultFundamentally a
default lack of demand in the economy 
defaultlies behind the problems of limited economic 
default–
default and
default 
defaultsocial - welfare a
defaultn
defaultd can be addressed, certainly in part, by 
defaultchanges in 
defaultpersonal t
defaultaxation
default that lead to greater spending power
default.
default2. defaultStdefaultamp Dutydefault Land Taxdefault.default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default3. defaultCorpdefaultoration Taxdefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default4. defaultLocal Taxesdefault&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default