&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultWritten Evidence submitted by NHS Blood and Transplantdefault (BTO0026)default&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultBackground
default&#xa0;default1
default. NHS Blood and Transplant
defaultNHS Blood and Transplant (NHSBT) is a Special Health Authority that includes, amongst its statutory obligations, 
defaultan obligation 
defaultto ‘promote or secure the effective transplantation of organs and tissues for the purposes of the health service’. As such, NHSBT supports both living and deceased organ donation
default,
default although living organ donation is regulated by the Human Tissue Authority. NHSBT works in close collaboration with healthcare professionals
default and professional bodies
default, devolved administrations and regulatory authorities, 
defaultand
default is responsible for the identification and characterisa
defaulttion of potential donors, obtaining
default consent
default (or 
defaultauthorisation 
defaultin 
defaultScotland
default) 
defaultfrom the family 
defaultfor organ and tissue donation 
defaultand offering those 
defaultdonated 
defaultorgans to surgeons for patients on the national transplant list. 
default1.1 
defaultMany organisations are involved in the
default defaultdelivery of organ donation and transplantation in the 
defaultUK
default but NHSBT plays a central role in working with clinicians, professional bodies, commissioners, regulators and national health departments as well as lay members, patients and patient groups, to improve the service to 
defaultUK
default patients.  
default1.2
default defaultThe policies for patient selection and organ allocation are developed by the Solid Organ Advisory Groups, which include representation from health care professionals involved in transplantation, after consultation with patients, patient groups and charities and other interested parties. These policies are reviewed and, after agreement, implemented by the Transplant Review Committee, a sub-group of the NHSBT Board. Clinical Governance and Outcome monitoring is led by NHSBT, working n close collaboration with clinicians, commissioners, regulators and national health departments.
default1.3
default defaultAs a consequence of implementation of the recommendations of the Organ Donor Task Force, the number of deceased donors has increased year on year: th
defaulte
defaultre were 936 deceased donors in the UK 
defaultbetween 1
defaultst
default April 2013 and 15
defaultth
default December 2013
default, 
default(compared with 817 in the same period last in 2012)
default,
default resulting in 2
default,
default483 solid organ transplants. 
defaultT
defaulthe number of people waiting for a solid organ transplant as of 15
defaultth
default December is 7
default,
default083
default (data from NHSBT www.odt.nhs.uk)
default. The availability of organs is insufficient to meet the demands.
default 
default2
default. 
defaultTransplants save lives and improve quality of life and save the NHS money
defaultSolid organ transplants are not only life saving and life enhancing but save the NHS money as dialysis is more expensive than transplantation. 
default3
default. 
defaultThe consequence of organ shortage
defaultKidney transplantation is offered mainly for those on dialysis and for
default the 5
default,
default767
default people awaiting a deceased donor kidney transplant
default.  T
defaulthe average wait
defaulting time
default is just over 3 years. For other organs, such as liver, heart or lung, the
default transplants are done to save life. 
defaultSelection criteria are developed, in part, to restrict access to the transplant list to ensure that those who are listed have a realistic expectation of being offered a gr
defaultaft, yet
default even with such restricted access to the transplant list, up to 
default20% of the 503 people currently
default listed for a 
defaultliver 
defaultgraft 
defaultand 490 people currently listed for a heart or lung transplant (as of 15
defaultth
default December 2013) 
defaultbecome too sick or die before a suitable graft is available. If more grafts were available, more people would be listed
default, fewer would die awaiting a graft
default and 
defaultmore 
defaultlives
default would be
default saved and improved.
default4
default. 
defaultOrgans are
default biomaterials
default and 
defaulttherefore 
defaultcarry risk
default which can be mitigated but not abolished
defaultOrgans are from humans and carry risk: these risks include the inadvertent transmission of some infections and cancer as well as other conditions such as metabolic 
defaultand autoimmune 
defaultdiseases. 
defaultNHSBT has issued guidance to ensure that potential transplant recipients are given appropriate information on the risks associated with transplantation (as well as the benefits) and so
default they can
default give fully informed consent.
default5
default. Use of donated organs requires a risk assessment
defaultThe risks associated with organ transplantation 
default(including inadvertent transmission of disease) 
defaultmust be balanced against the risks of death without a transplant. The 
defaultrisks can and are mitigated but cannot be abolished. In the limited time between death being declared or treatment considered futile and agreement made for treatment to be withdrawn, families must be asked for and give consent
default (or 
defaultauthorisation 
defaultin Scotland) 
defaultand 
defaultthen 
defaultan assessment made 
defaultto assess
default associated risk. This 
defaultassessment 
defaultincludes 
defaultreview
default of 
defaultthe 
defaultmedical and social history (
defaultobtained 
defaultfrom the hospital records, family and family doctor), review of previous available investigations and agreed screening tests for viruses and other infections, cancer and the state of the organs. Information is made available to the 
defaultrecipient 
defaultsurgeon according to agreed protocols and the surgeon must decide whether to accept the organ for a given patient (who 
defaultwill have given informed consent
default). 
defaultFurthermore, the degree of risk taken will depend not only on the donor and organ characteristics but also the recipient: for example, a liver from a donor with a risk of cancer transmission may be accepted for a person in acute liver failure and so expected to die within three days if no graft were available but declined for a recipient with end-stage cirrhosis who has a life expectation without transplantation, of 8 months.
default6
default. 
defaultThere are national and international protocols for donor characterisation
defaultDonor characterisation is the process by which information is sought and made available for risk assessment. The information includes a medical, social and travel history taken from the clinical staff, the hospital records, the family and, where possible, the family doctor. The available investigations are reviewed and additional tests requested. 
defaultThe tests required for donor characterisation have been described by a variety of int
defaulternational and national bodies, 
defaultincluding 
defaultthe Advisory Committee on the Safety of Blood, Tissues and Organs (
defaultSaBTO
default), the Council of Europe 
defaultand professional organisations. 
defaultThe characterisation of donors is regulated by the Human Tissue Authority under the European Union Directive on Organ Donation.
default6
default.
default1
default defaultThe microbiological investigations requested by NHSBT 
defaultare
default wider than required 
defaultunder the EU Directive but 
default include routinely Hepatitis B and C viruses, Cytomegalovirus, Human Immunodeficiency Virus, Human T-lymphocytic virus, syphilis,
default and
default Epstein-Barr virus. 
defaultTests for o
defaultther infectious agents, such as malaria, Trypanosomiasis cruzi or 
defaultWest Nile
default virus will be requested as 
defaultclinically indicated
default 
defaulte.
defaultg
default.
default on the basis of travel history.
default 
default6.2
default defaultThese guidelines and regulations
default all recognise that 
defaultthe decision to use organs involves balancing risks. They also recognise that 
defaultnot all possible information will be available, because of the limitations of available investigations and the time required for some blood tests and, furthermore, that some blood tests may fail to detect infection or may wrongly diagnose infection.
default7. 
defaultAbsolute contra-indications for organ donation
defaultNHSBT, in collaboration
default with professional organisations and clinicians, have agreed a short list of absolute contra-indications to organ donation (
defaulthttp://odt.nhs.uk/pdf/contraindications_to_organ_donation.pdf
default)
default. These
default include a d
defaultefinite, probable or possible case of human TSE, including CJD and vCJD, individuals whose blood relatives have had familial CJD, other neurodegenerative diseases associated with infectious agents, TB: active and untreated and HIV
default disease (but not HIV infection
default).
default Other contra-indications include widespread cancers and untreated sepsis.
default8
default. 
defaultRisks of prion transmission by organ transplantation
defaultIt is
default recognised that 
defaultsporadic 
defaultCJD has been transmitted by transplantation of corneal tissue and dura mater in a very small number of cases. We are not aware of any case of prion transmission by solid organ transplantation in the 
defaultUK
default or elsewhere. 
defaultWe are, however, not complacent. 
defaultWe recognise the potential possibility that prion transmission may occur as a consequence of organ transmission and, as with any surgical procedure, surgical instruments us
defaulted in retrieval or implantation
default may transmit disease to other patients. We also recognise the potential for immunosuppressive agents, required to prevent graft loss, could have an impact on 
defaultprion disease 
defaultprogression, although whether that impact is positive or negative is unknown. 
defaultWe also appreciate that any lack of appearance of the effect of prion infection may not yet be apparent in the transplan
defaultt population because of the
default incubation times.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default9. 
defaultMitigation of risk of prion transmission by organ donation and transplantation
defaultA number of steps are in place to mitigate the risks of prion transmissi
defaulton. Specialist Nurses in Organ D
defaultonation are 
defaulthighly 
defaulttrained by NHSBT and follow well documented protocols, specifically seeking information about risks of, amongst other issues, exposure to possi
defaultble prion-contaminated material and
default a personal or family history of unexplained degenerative neurological disease.
default 
defaultThis level of inquiry is much deeper
default and wider
default than for living patients undergoing routine 
defaultor emergency 
defaultsurgery.
default9
default.
default1
default defaultIt should be noted that p
defaulteople dying from any cause of degenerative 
defaultneurological 
defaultdisease are unlikely to become organ donors because their mode of death 
defaultusually 
defaultrenders them unlikely to be candidates for organ donation.
default9.2
default defaultShould a solid organ recipient develop a known donor transmitted disease, clinicians are obliged under 
defaultthe terms of 
defaultt
defaultheir licence, to report this to NHSBT who will investigate whether any other people received an organ from that donor and ensure that there is a full investigation and appropriate reporting.
default1
default0
default. Risks of cancer transmission
defaultOrgan donation is also associated with the risk of inadvertent transmission of cancer and there are national and international guidelines to support the surgeon in making a decision. 
default1
default0.1
default defaultIn some cases, the presence or past history of cancer is known at the time of donation or a cancer is detected at the time of retrieval or preparation
default of the organ for implantation.
defaultA decision whether or not to use organs from such donors will depend on many factors including the type of cancer, the stage of cancer, the treatment given and the interval between treatment and death. In many cases, the presence of cancer in the transplanted organs is unknown at the time of donation and transplantation. Indeed, a recent review of the 
defaultUK
default experience showed that in all cases (fewer than 0.05% transplants) of transmitted cancer, the presence of tumour was not known at the time of donation.
default1
default1
default. Transmission of other conditions
defaultBoth metabolic and autoimmune conditions can be transmitted by organ transplantation.  These occur rarely: in the last 12 months, NHSBT has been informed of one case of transmitted autoimmune thrombocytopenic purpura and one case of acute intermittent porphyria.
default1
default2
default. 
defaultBalance of risks
defaultNHSBT takes its responsibilities very seriously but for organ transplantation, the balance of risks for the patient is quite different to that of blood and tissues. The number of deaths and removals (because of failing health) from the national waiting list and the poor quality of life of those awaiting a transplant mean that any reduction in the donor pool will have an adverse impact on the patients and their family: the removal of just one donor will mean
default, o
defaultn average, that 3 or 4 people will be denied a transplant and maybe one will die. 
default1
default3
default. 
defaultThe Organ Donation Strategy (Ta
defaultking T
defaultransplantation to 2020)
defaultThe initial strategy for NHSBT was set by the Organ Donation Task Force; this group made a number of recommendations to improve organ donation in the 
defaultUK
default. The Task Force claimed that, if all the recommendations were implemented, then a 50% increase in the number of deceased organ donors should be achieved in 5 years. This target was reached on time in April 2013. To follow, the initial strategy, a
default new organ donation strategy
default – Taking Organ Transplantation to 2020 -
default 
defaultwas developed after widespread consultation with lay, patient and professional groups and advice from international organisations. This new strategy 
defaultwas si
defaultgned off by ministers from all four
default national health departments and was launched in 2013. It is a strategy for the whole 
defaultUK
default and not just for NHSBT. The new strategy focuses on increasing the number of solid organ transplants and 
defaultimproving 
defaultthe outcome for the patients. 
default14
default. 
defaultTransplantation 
defaultrates 
defaultcan be increased without reduction in quality
defaultThe 
defaultUK
default has the second highest family refusal rate for consent/authorisation for organ donation in 
defaultEurope
default (at 46%)
default,
default so the greatest gain in the number of transplants will come from reducing this refusal rate. 
defaultSome o
defaultther European countries 
default(such as 
defaultSpain
default) 
defaulthave refusal rates of 10% or less. 
defaultFurthermore, over the last 6 years, the UK has had an increase 
defaultof
default nearly 60% in the number of deceased donors, and this is associated with an improving survival following transplantation showing that the increase in organ donation is not at the expense of worse outcomes for patients
default showing that increased activity need not come at the expense of reducing quality
default.
default14.1
default defaultThe 
defaultnew organ donation s
defaulttrategy does include 
defaultan aim to
default increase
default the
default use of higher risk organs. This aim refers to those organs that might be less likely to function and calls for research to improve the quality of organs (such as normothermic pulsatile 
defaultorgan 
defaultperfusion
default or normothermic regional perfusion
default): the strategy nowhere encourages the greater use of organs from potential donors with the risk of transmitting infection or other disease or lowering the standard assessment of donors.
default14.2
default defaultIt must be stressed that implementation of this Strategy does in no way imply any lowering of standards; indeed, the Strategy r
defaultequires NHSBT and others to work to 
defaultraise the quality of donated organs.
default15
default. 
defaultSummary
default1. 
default              
defaultThe potential for solid organ transplants to transmit diseases is accepted and many 
default              
defaultprocesses are in place to mitigate this risk. 
default2. 
default              
defaultNHSBT and the donation and transplant communities are not complacent about 
default              
defaultthese
default 
defaultrisks
default.
default3 
default              
defaultI
defaultt must be recognised that the use of organs for transplantation involves balancing 
default              
defaultrisks: the risk of inadvertent disease transmission is currently very low (less than 1%) 
default              
defaultwhile the death rate without transplantation approaches 20% for some organs. 
default 
default4. 
default              
defaultNHSBT works closely with both national and international organisations to ensure 
default              
defaultstandards in the 
defaultUK
default are at least as good as those in other countries.
default5
default.
default              
defaultThe new
default organ donation
default strategy
default 
defaultbuilds on the success of the last 5 years and aims to increase the number and quality of transplants but this 
default              
defaultdoes not mean an increase in risk of disease transmission.
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default