              
default              
defaultDIS 50
defaultThe Australian Government’s approach 
defaultto ensuring 
defaultpeople with disability
default 
defaultbenefit from our 
defaultaid program is set out in the strategy document, 
defaultDevelopment for All: Towards a disability-inclusive Australian aid program 2009-2014
default (
defaultDevelopment for All
default).
default The strategy aims to ensure that people with disability are included in and benefit equally from Australia’s aid program.  I
defaultn 2011-2012 Australia provided AUD 
default108.7 million to improve the quality of life for people with disability throughout the aid program.
defaultDevelopment for All
default is informed by the principles of Article 32 of the 
defaultUN 
defaultConvention
default on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
default, including non-discrimination, full and effective participation and inclusion in society
default,
default and equality of 
defaultopportunity and accessibility.  
defaultIn 
default2013 
defaultthe 
defaultOECD
default Development 
defaultAssistance Committee Peer Review highlighted 
defaultAustralia’s
default ‘exceptional emphasis on disability which makes it a leader in this area internationally’.
default  
default  
defaultAustralia’s success in this area has been supported by strong (and bipartisan) political leadership and commitment as well as clear direction from the Executive of AusAID (now the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT)).
defaultIn developing the strategy, comprehensive consultations were undertaken with a wide range of stakeholders including people with disability in our partner countries, and their families.  This has reaped real benefits in terms of internal and external commitment to the strategy, as well as its relevance. 
defaultEnsuring an active central role by people with disability is a guiding principle of the 
defaultDevelopment for All
default strategy, and including people with disability in aid program decision making has contributed to more effective programming.  A 
defaultDisability-Inclus
defaultive Development Reference Group was established in 2009 to provide
default 
defaulthigh-level 
defaultguidance on the
default implementation of the 
defaultDevelopment for All
default strategy.  This Group includes 
defaultinternational and Australian leaders in disability-inclusive development, several of whom themselves have a disability
default. 
defaultMost recently, 
defaultthe
default Australian Government 
defaultannounced
default 
defaulton December
default 
default3, 2013 
defaultthat
default a new disability
default-inclusive development
default strategy 
defaultwould be prepared in 2014
default.  
defaultT
defaulthe 
defaultfocus of the 
defaultnew 
defaultstrategy will 
defaultbe consistent with 
defaultAustralia’s 
defaultbroader aid strategy to promote poverty reduction through sustainable 
defaulteconomic 
defaultdevelopment by
default building skills, creating jobs and fostering economic growth in the Indo-Pacific region.
default 
defaultIn addition to a strategic focus on our region, the Australian Government will also be strengthening performance measures and introducing rigorous benchmarks to make sure our aid program is delivered as efficiently and effectively as possible.
default&#xa0;
defaultA dedicated tea
defaultm
default in DFAT
default, the Disability Policy Section,
default 
defaultprovides
default advice and guidance to staff in
default 
defaultintegrating disability concerns into aid programs
default.  I
defaultn addition
default,
default 
defaultregional specialist positions 
defaultbased in 
defaultFiji
default, to cover the Pacific
default 
defaultregion;
default 
defaultand Cambodia
default, to c
defaultover the Mekong and 
defaultPhilippines;
default 
defaulthave
default 
defaultraised 
defaultthe profile of disability-inclusive development in the
defaultir respective
default regions
default and are seen as a valuable resource by our country programs.
default  
defaultThe Department’s d
defaultisability-inclusive development focal points 
defaultare 
defaultstaff who 
defaulthave 
defaultvolunteer
defaulted
default to play an advocacy and advice role on disability-inclusive development issues within their team
defaults
default, and who are trained and supported to play this role
default.  Around sixty focal points 
defaultare located in 
defaultpolicy areas in 
defaultCanberra and at 15 overseas posts.
defaultA series of guidance notes 
defaultprovides policy direction for staff. 
default 
defaultGuidance notes finalised to date include 
defaulta
default 
defaulthandbook for
default accessible design (with a focus on physical accessibility of the built environment) and 
defaulta note 
defaulton 
defaultdisability-inclusion in 
defaultsocial prot
defaultection programs.  W
defaultork
default is 
defaultunderway on a disability-inclusive education note.  
defaultAustralian Government
default support to build the leadership skills of 
defaultdisabled people’s organisations (
defaultDPOs
default)
default and people with disability,
default 
defaultincluding 
defaultthrough the Pacific Disability Forum, Disability Rights Fund and scholarships 
defaultschemes
default,
default 
defaultis
default assisting people with disability to advocate for greater inclusion of people with disability within their countries
default and to demonstrate the contributions that people with disability can make
default.  
defaultAustralia recognises that there is 
defaultlimited evidence 
defaultinternationally 
defaulton what works 
defaultin relation to disability-inclusive development.  
defaultDFAT is
default assisting to build 
defaultthe evidence base
default by supporting 
defaultrelevant 
defaultresearch.  
defaultThe lack of data on people with disability has also been regularly raised by our country programs as a barrier to getting governments to take this issue seriously.  We are looking at opportunities to support inclusion of questions on disability within upcoming censuses
default in partner countries
default, and are supporting work to improve internationally comparable data, such as through the World Health Organisation’s development of a model disability survey.
defaultThe interaction of efforts to prevent disability (for example, through activities which tackle avoidable blindness or clear land mines) with disability-inclusive development can be a sensitive issue.  In
default line with the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabil
defaultities, the Australian Government’s 
defaultwork to promote disability-inclusive development 
defaultis focused
default on improving the quality of life for people with existing disability, rather than 
defaultdisability 
defaultprevention activities.  Prevention of disability, while an important public health objective, is not the same as disability-inclusive development
default,
default and 
defaultthere has been criticism of the 
defaultDevelopment for All
default strategy from some stakeholders
default for 
defaultits inclusion of prevention
default within a broader disability-inclusive development strategy.  
defaultTo respond to these concerns
default,
default prevent
defaultion
default activities
default have been managed
default outside of the Disability Policy Section since 2011, in health, infrastructure and mine action
default sections
default.  
defaultAustralia works closely with the UK on disability-inclusive development, including through the current secondment of a DFID officer to DFAT’s Disability Policy Section, for two years from July 2013.
defaultFurther information is available on the DFAT website,
default at: 
defaulthttp://aid.dfat.gov.au/aidissues/did/Pages/home.aspx
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default