&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Lakeside Cross Disability Self Help Group
default&#xa0;
defaultBefore I start with my response to 
defaultthese questions
default, I want to congratulate you 
defaultfor your kind support and to recognize the inclusion of everyone in society. We are Lakeside Cross Disability Self Help Group, a 
defaultC
defaultommunity Based Organization of persons with 
defaultdisabilities
default in very remote community in Ghana.
defaultDRF is one organization that works inclusively to support 
defaultmuch
default marginalized group of persons with 
defaultdisabilities
default to promote the rights and dignity of persons with disabilities. 
defaultDRF focuses on building the capacity of marginalized groups. With the support from DRF, we have been able to form several Self Help Groups, liaise with government, CSOs and other NGOs for 
defaultbetter collaboration. With this regard DRF has supported us train all leaders and provided them with the necessary skills that will enable them identify challenges in their own communities and find appropriate strategies of resolving them among the
defaultmselves and their stakeholders. Some Organizations do not support small groups like Lakeside with the perception that they have low level of education and are not enlighten
defaulted
default on issues. 
defaultWith DRF we have made tremendous advancement through the grant support and have lobbied for greater opportunities for PWDs. We want to say much development would not have been made 
defaultwithout DRF. We appreciate your support to DRF.
default&#xa0;
defaultIt is quite difficult to say much of 
defaultthis
default question as we do not really know a lot of DFID’
defaults work outside DRF. However if programs are constructed to involve persons with disabilities
default and to involve th
defaultem in decision making process
default it will help the disability community
default. I humbly suggest that DRF’ response to this question will be useful.
defaultAgain we do not know much of your relationship with government concerning the implementation of the UNCRPD, however in relation to my home country much need to be done concerning the implementation of the CRPD. Organizations that get funds to work at the national level must have strong collaboration with other CBO
defaults
default, CSOs
default and NGOs to fight for the implementation. If more training could be organized for grantee 
defaultorganizations on how to build very strong voice to fight for the implementation of the UNCRPD. In our own small way we are doing very 
defaultwell
default but l think it will be good to share your 
defaultwider
default experience with us s o that we are able to ensure and great push for the implementation.
default&#xa0;
defaultWe 
defaultwould
default be grateful if DRF 
defaultcould respond
default to this particular question.
default&#xa0;
defaultThanks and we hope to 
defaultrespond to any concern or clarification you may want 
defaultto
default seek.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default