              
default              
default&#xa0;defaultDIS 59defaultWritten Evidence Submitted by The Children’s Book Project for Tanzania (CBP)defaultExecutive SummarydefaultHigh quality education for all children, including disabled children, in their first years of schooling builds a foundation for future learning and for healthy and productive family and civic life. Literacy skills equip a person both to  gain knowledge and understanding of their immediate environment, and to make sense of the wider world. Research shows that a child who is able to read and write is better able to contribute to his or her personal and community well being. 
defaultThe Primary Education Development Plan (PEDP III), Big Results Now (BRN) and the LANES literacy and numeracy proposal all firmly recognize the importance of education to support literacy development, so as to ensure better lives for  Tanzanians including people with disabilities. But the challenges are many, including semi-trained teachers for literacy, a lack of Braille reading materials to read, besides having few textbooks transcribed into Braille.
defaultThe CBP’s experience in Braille book provision is in line with  DFID’s mission to support disabled children and youths to improve their lives, and prepare them to become responsible citizens in their communities.
default1.0default&#xa0; 
defaultIntroductiondefaultThe Children’s Book Project
default for Tanzania is a local N
defaulton – Governmental 
defaultO
defaultrganization whose main goals are to cultivate a strong reading culture among children in Tanzania through the provision of books to children for the purpose of increasing and widening their knowledge and developing their reading skills; 
defaultthrough 
default the teaching of literacy and support for reading in the formal education system 
defaultvia in-
defaultservice training of teachers
default;
default and 
defaultthrough 
defaultsupporting indigenous authorship and publishing.
default              
default2.0default&#xa0; 
defaultDescription of CBP ActivitiesdefaultCBP
default’s
default programme has three main components which include:
defaultCBP implements  professional development for 
defaultt
defaultrainers. This
default is 
defaultled by CBP’s experienced staff. Trainers are trained for 15 days
default, divided into three 5-
defaultday workshop sessions spread out
default over 8 months. 
defaultIn addition to training of teachers, CBP provides reading materials to help children l
defaultearn to read and develop life-
defaultlong habits of reading. Schools are supplied with reading materials
default,
default and teachers are given training in library management and in reading promotion
default.
defaultCBP provides book sector training to publishers, writers, illustrators and editors, with the aim of develop
defaulting
default 
defaulttheir 
defaultprofessional skills
default, 
default hence improving the quality of the books produced.
default3.0 Provisiondefault 
defaultof Braille Books for Visually Impaired Children.defaultRationale for the Project
defaultIn 1994 CBP organized a Children’s Book Day at the National Library. Among the invited children where visually impaired children from Uhuru Mchanganyiko, in Ilala District, Dar es Salaam region. The children performed a poem which  
defaultexpressed how 
default they were being neglected in CBP’s book project activities, while normal ch
defaultildren were provided with books
default.
defaultThe children raised their concern that they had very few textbooks in Braille and there were no reading books. 
defaultFollowing the request, CBP embarked on a programme 
defaultto produce 
default Braille books for visually impaired children. Those were the first readers ever produced for visually impaired children in the countr
defaulty. To date, CBP has transcribed 37 story books for visually impaired children. The books have been distributed to 25 schools which cater for  disabled children.
defaultCurrently there are more than 2,000 visually impaired children in primary schools in Tanzania. Among them are two specials namely Bwigili in Dodoma region and Furaha in Tabora region. There are also integrated schools which are Uhuru Mchanganyiko in Dar es Salaam,Mazinyungu in Morogoro region and another one in Lushoto, the rest are inclusive schools.
default 
default4.0 defaultChallengesdefaultChildren
defaultTeachers
default5.0 Recommendeddefault ActivitiesdefaultCBP will carry out 
defaulta 
defaultneeds assessment to determine the actual number of visually impaired children who are in primary schools in Tanzania. The number of visually impaired children will determine the print run of the Braille books to be produced and distributed to schools. Apart from getting this crucial information, the project will
default also provide data on 
defaultthe list of schools with such children and number of tutors and teachers available for these children. The information will support project planning.
default2.
default defaultTraining of Trainers
default S
defaultelect
default a
default number of tuto
defaultrs from the colleges which train teachers for visually impaired children and train them on how to teach effective literacy skills .and prepare them to become trainers and mentors.
default.
default T
defaultrain teachers through in-service teacher training
default, using the  t
defaultrain the tra
defaultiner model.
default. The initiative i
defaults focusing on enabling 
defaultteachers to acquire book management
default skills
default 
default for
default Braille books, and provid
defaulting
default them with basic librarian skills
default;
defaulta
defaultnd also working to to incorporate reading materials into the school’s instructional strategies and  culture through library development and instructional practice.
default.
defaultThe Braille book provision i
defaultnitiative strongly supports PEDP
default III which states the necessity for school libraries and supplementary materials 
defaultto support learning and teaching.
defaultProvision of Braille Books to 
defaultintegrated
default schools which cater for visually
default impaired
default children and to 
defaultinclusive schools 
defaultwill 
defaultsupport instruction strategies, literacy development and learning outcomes. These materials will support the quality of education, the country’s literacy development and nurture children’s lifelong habits of reading during a formative period of learning.
defaultCBP has participated in the preparation of the government (Ministry of Education and Vocational Training) proposal on literacy and numeracy (LANES) to the Global Partnership in Education (GPE), which has been approved. The proposal to GPE  accommodated neither the  provision of reading books to both normal and visually impaired children nor the establishment of school libraries.
defaultFurthermore, these measures were also absent from the new presidential initiative Big Results Now (BRN) and the PEDP III activities In this respect CBP is appealing to DFID to take the responsibility to provide Braille Books to improve the children’s outcome and eventually contribute to improving the quality education.
defaultDecember 2013
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default3
default&#xa0;
default