&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by 
defaultProfessor Jane 
defaultDacre
default, former Medical Director 
defaultMRCP(
defaultUK), until December 2013, and Director UCL Medical School, London.
default&#xa0;
defaultI have recently visited Myanmar in my capacity as the Medical Director of the 
defaultMRCP(
defaultUK) examination. This 
defaultis a well-
defaultknown international examination for Physicians, run by the Federation of Medical Royal Colleges in the UK. The examination has a t
defaultotal of 24,000 candidates world-
defaultwide per year. In November 2013, the clinical component of the examination, the Practical Assessment of Clinical Examination Skills (PACES) was successfully introduced to Myanmar, following a pathfinder exercise which was extremely well received.
defaultThis has allowed the building of close working relationships with local physicians, and has led to a productive and on-going dialogue
default, and a degree of understanding of the difficulties being experienced by the Myanmar doctors and their patients
default. 
defaultWhilst in Myanmar, we had the privilege of meeting Daw 
defaultAung
default San 
defaultSuu
default 
defaultKhi
default, and hearing her plans for 
defaultthe rejuvenation of the Yangon General H
defaultospital
default. This 
defaultis a very important 
defaultlandmark in M
defaultyanmar’s history
default,  
defaultand
default a crucial tertiary care centre for local people with low incomes
default. We visited the hospital, which 
defaultis in significant disrepair, requiring a complete (and very costly) refurbishment package to update it to modern (NHS level) standards.
default She is keen to make progress on this.
defaultColleagues working in Myanmar, both from Yangon and other cities are working under extremely difficult conditions, using out of date educational methods in system which appears overwhelmed and under regulated compared to the UK.
default In addition, their
default opportunities for medical research have dwindled over the past two decades, and it is recognised that medical education is stronger when coupled with research. 
default In my opinion, they need support to rebuild a health system which is appropriate to their local context. This would be most likely to be achieved by investment in the medical education system
default, and the appropriate regulation of medical education
default.  
defaultMedical Schools in the UK have recently increased their international reach, and have increasing experience of supporting overseas institutions to improve their curricula and assessment systems.  Investment in academic support from these institutions would give the opportunity for a locally led and embedded project to raise and modernise the health system in a locally appropriate manner
default in Myanmar
default.
defaultDiscussions have been held between UCL Medical School (Professor Dacre), and the Royal College of Physicians of London (Professor David 
defaultWarrell
default)
default, who are very keen to move forward with plans to develop undergraduate and postgraduate training support, and to explore the rebuilding of research capacity in Myanmar.  Currently, however, this is not possible due to lack of funds, and would need investment. It has been difficult to find a funding source that supports this kind of development. Support is often tailored to
default traditional
default research projects, and infrastructure.  
defaultUCL
default Medical School
default 
defaulth
defaultas just submitted a bid, with colleagues in Myanmar, to a joint initiative by the ESRC, MRC, UK
default-
defaultaid and the 
defaultWellcome
default Trust, to conduct a piece of qualitative educational research to look at local educational n
defaulteeds. If funded, this would provide
default a clearer picture of the local medical education 
defaultsituation, and would provide evidence for redevelopment. However, these research funds rarely fund educational research
default, so the bid may not be successful
default.
defaultIn summary, 
defaultI suggest that investment in the local medical education system, with support from the UK
default to provide context specific education and training
default is likely to pave the way for more sustainable improvements in the health system in resource poor countries
default, and in particular, in Myanmar
default.
default My understanding from local 
defaultMyanmar medical 
defaultcolleagues is that this would be positively received, both by the local doctors, the Universities, and the Ministry of Health.
default 
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default