&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted by Dr Thomas Lundbergdefault, University of Glasgowdefault (DWB 10)defaultSummary:
defaultWith regard to the electoral arrangements for the National Assembly for Wales, I strongly support restoration of the right for candidates to stand for election both in constituencies and on regional lists simultaneously (‘dual candidacy’) because this 
defaultwoul
defaultd promote more electoral competition at the constituency level, helping voters both at election time and between elections, with the greater likelihood of the 
default‘
defaultshadowing
default’
default of constituency Assembly Members by their regional counterparts who hope to seek elec
defaulttion locally; it would also mean that parties would be more likely to get their strongest candidates elected, 
defaultwhich would strengthen the democratic process; and it
default 
defaultis the norm in mixed-member proportional (MMP
default – the term used internationally by most politi
defaultcal scientists to describe what the British government calls the additional member system
default) electoral systems
default elsewhere
default in the world. 
defaultMaintaining
default the ban 
defaultgoes against the logic of proportional representation 
default(PR) 
defaultand would perpetuate what appeared to be a p
defaultartisan rigging of the Assembly’s electoral system
default.
default1. 
defaultThe 
defaultLabour Party
default, in general,
default 
defaultopposes dual candidacy
default in MMP elections (used for the Scottish Parliament, National Assembly for Wales, and London Assembly)
default, with claims that it is undemocratic for candi
defaultdates who were
default, in the 
defaultterminology
default of some in the party
default,
default ‘rejected’ 
defaultby voters 
defaultin constituency races 
defaultonly 
defaultto 
defaultenter
default an assembly or parliament through the ‘back door’ of the 
defaultregional 
defaultparty list. Former Welsh Secretary Peter Hain was so opposed to dual candida
defaultcy that he 
defaultled the effort to have
default the practice banned for Assembly elections (from 2007), despite the fact that nearly all Labour constituency candidates in the previous (2003) elections were also party list candidates. At the most recent elections
default in 2011
default, dual candidacy remained
default banned in Wales, but not i
defaultn Scotland, where 19% of Labour’
defaults nominees were dual candidates, compared to 78% for the Scottish National Party (SNP), 86% for the Conservatives, an
defaultd 52% for the Liberal Democrats.
default2. 
defaultCritics 
defaultof the ban 
defaultpointed out the partisan appearance of the 
defaultaction
default. The Electoral Commission noted this problem in its 2005 statement opposing the
default proposal
default, where it rejected Labour’s argument
default that the 
defaultpublic opposed dual candidacy because it had 
defaultfound no evidence of such 
defaultopposition. 
defaultIn the 2006 debate over this issue, 
defaultConservative M
defaultembers of the House of Commons also pointed out the appearance of 
defaultLabour 
defaultpartisanship, noting that
default because of Labour’s advantage in Welsh constituencies,
default 
defaulto
defaultthe
defaultr
default parties
default would be more likely to nominate weaker candidates in strong Labour areas if dual candidacy were banned
default because the regional list route would probably be safer
default. While the result since the ban 
defaultwas enacted 
defaultis hard to test 
defaultbecause many other factors are invo
defaultlved in 
defaultelections
default (‘correlation is not causation’
default, as social scientists would say
default)
default, the ban c
defaultould 
defaulthave mad
defaulte constituency contests less competitive and
default, therefore,
default 
defaultmight
default have been 
defaultbad for voters.
default 
default3. My research into the constituency role of MMP-elected rep
defaultresentatives (and relations between them) shows that 
defaultthere have been tensions between constituency- and list-elected members of the National Assembly for Wales and the Scottish Parliament, and that the situation in the UK is worse than the situation in Ger
defaultmany, where the modern form of MMP originated. 
defaultChapter 6 of my 2007 book 
default(see below) 
defaultrecounts the frustration many constituency representatives felt when encountering ‘shadowing’ by list-elected representatives who sought to raise their profile locally, re
defaultsponding to the electoral incentive provided by MMP and dual candidacy – representatives elected via their party’s regional list wo
defaultuld focus constituency service o
defaultn a geographical constituency in which they planned to seek 
defaulttheir party’s nomination at the n
defaultext election. 
defaultIn the early years of devolution, most 
defaultWelsh and Scottish constituency-elected representatives were from
default the Labour Party facing regional list-elected representatives from other parties
default, so there is a partisan dimension to the tensions. 
defaultWhile
default this
default competitive situation
default may have been uncomfortable for representatives elected in constituencies, it focused more attention on constituents in some constituencies previously seen as safe, so could have been good for 
defaultthose 
defaultconstituents’ interests.
default4. 
defaultF
defaultor parties, there 
defaultare problems associated with banning dual candidacy – they 
defaultmay
default fail to elect their strongest c
defaultandidates, resulting in a weakening of the democratic process. In Wales, the 2011 election saw the Conservative leader fail to win a regional li
defaultst seat due to the unexpectedly strong performance of his party’s constituency candidates in that region. 
defaultIn Scotland, many high profile 
defaultLabour candidates did not partake of dual candidacy and lost their constituency seats
default in 2011
default, so were not able to re-e
defaultnter the Scottish Parliament. Some have become assistants to novice candidates who did win (and were presumably not expected to do so). Scottish Labour went from 53 constituency and 3 list members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs) in the first (1999) elect
defaultion to 15 constituen
defaultcy and 22 list in 2011. The loss
default of so many experienced Labour MSPs in the last election makes it more difficult for the opposition to the SNP majority government (the party won 69 of the 129 seats) to scrutinise 
defaultit
default effectively.
default 
default5. 
defaultMMP
default is a form of 
defaultPR
default, so the winner-take-all element derived from 
defaultconstituency
default contests can, for many people, b
defaulte a confusing holdover from the
default ‘first-past-the-post’ system. It is understandable that people might find it difficult to accept the apparent resurrection of candidates who lose 
defaultconstituency
default contests
default, and part of the Labour Party’s opposition to dual candidacy probably 
defaultcomes
default from a
default high
defaultly
default majoritarian understanding of democracy
default. 
defaultSuch a 
defaultzero-sum 
defaultview
default,
default however, is incompatible with the 
defaultpositive
default-
defaultsum 
defaultlogic of 
defaultPR
default.
default MMP is about a larger contest that takes place across 
defaultthe 
defaultelectoral regions 
defaultof
default Wales
default in which 
defaulta party’s overall (constituency plus
default regional)
default 
defaultseat allocation is determined
default, more or less,
default by
default 
defaultits
default party vote
default because of the (roughly) compensatory linkage between the constituency and regional tiers of seats
default. The 
defaultconstituency
default contests determine who is the ‘local’ 
defaultAssembly Member (
defaultAM
default)
default, thoug
defaulth list 
defaultAMs
default 
defaulttypically
default undertake a constituency role, and this can be important for those voters who were unsuccessful in electing their choice of a 
defaultconstituency 
defaultcandidate as a means of linking them into the political system.
default 
default6. 
defaultBecause dual candidacy is
default a
default 
defaulttypical 
defaultfeature 
defaultof MMP systems (as well as 
defaultmost
default mixed-member majoritarian 
default(MMM) systems, in which constituency and regional or national list seat tiers are not linked and PR
default overall 
defaultis not achieved)
default, and because 
defaultthe dual candidacy ban for 
defaultWelsh Assembly el
defaultections was not in place at the outset, nor was it enacted for Scottish Parliamen
defaultt or London Assembly elections, I was shocked when the 
defaultBritish
default government enacted the ban. 
defaultWhile I have studied electoral systems for years, and am familiar with other countri
defaultes’ experiences 
defaultof
default the manipulation of these systems for partisan advantage, I would never have expected a British government to carry out what appeared to be such a blatantly partisan attempt to rig an electoral system. Perhaps I 
defaultwas
default naïve, having gr
defaultown u
defaultp in the United States believing British democracy to be of a higher calibre than this. For those electoral systems experts looking at Britain from outside, noting that the few countries 
defaultwith
default mixed-membe
defaultr systems 
defaultthat ban
default dual candidacy include the less-th
defaultan-democratic Ukraine and
default 
defaultThailand
default (among a few others)
default, the inclusion of Wal
defaultes in this group is disturbing.
default7. In Germany, longstanding user of MMP, dual candidacy is not controversial. 
defaultWhile there was some controversy, 
defaultNew Zealand has recently examined 
defaultdual candidacy 
defaultand has chosen to retain
default it
default. I hope the National Assembly for Wales will revert to 
defaultits
default former situation of allowing dual candidacy. While it may be outside the remit of this committee
default’s enquiry
default, I 
defaultwould also recommend increasing the size of 
defaultthe Assembly to 80 by simply adding another 20 regional members
default (four more to each of the five existing electoral regions)
default. This would increase the 
defaultproportionality of election results and make the Assembly more representative of the 
defaultvoters
default of Wales.
default&#xa0;
default15 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default2
default&#xa0;
default