              
default&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence defaultfrom Association of Ambulance Chief Executivesdefault (UEC0005)defaultAmbulance Service Views on how A&amp;E’s are Performingdefault              defaultSUMMARYdefaultThe Association of Ambulance Chief Executives (AACE) provides ambulance services with an organisation that 
defaultinfluences, 
defaultsupport
defaults
default,
default 
defaultco-ordinates and implements nationally agreed policy.  It also provides the general public and other stakeholders with a centra
defaultl source of information about NHS ambulance services.  AACE
default’s primary focus
default is the ongoing development of the English ambulance service and the improvement of patient care.
defaultThe Health Select Committee’s inquiry into emergency services and emergency care is
default welcomed by the AACE we are 
default pleased to provide further information for consideration.
defaultBackgrounddefaultAmbulance Trusts in England have
default managed well through the 
defaultwinter
default to d
defaultate, as we would expect them to, 
defaultimplementing plans drawn together following
default debriefing and learning from
default the previous 
defaultyear’s
default activities
default.  
defaultWinter has
default however still
default posed issues for ambulance services, particularly with regards to delayed hospital handovers, and increased 999 call 
defaultdemands
default. The handover delays have been slightly le
defaultss than last year, but we have been fortunate to have a mild winter to date which has not realised some of the activity we may have expected at this point in the season. Although some Ambulance Trust are not achieving all response time targets – Ambulance 
defaultServices are generally coping, and providing safe services for patients.
default&#xa0;
defaultSeveral
default 
defaultAmbulances
default Trusts have reported discourse 
defaultin their areas 
defaultregarding the allocation of the additional 
default£250m 
defaultfunding 
defaultand subsequent £150m 
defaultto A&amp;E 
defaultDepartments
default this 
defaultwinter as there appears to be a perception this is simply rewarding failing organisations and does not address the root issues in capacity and capability. Some Ambulance Trust are reporting they hav
defaulten’t 
defaultseen any
default tangible impact of this extra funding, aside from a slight decrease in hospital handover delays, (circa 70% of the delays being experienced over the same period last year) however it is more likely the impr
defaultoved performance is due to
default other factors and init
defaultiatives which were implemented earlier in 
default2013 m
defaultore locally.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultAmbulances Trusts are keen to understand how the 
defaultimpact of th
defaultis funding will be measured by NHS England, and how this will then inform the allocation of the £250m next winter.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn 2013 
defaultHandover Delay 
defaultfines were introduced 
defaultfor both Acute Trusts and Ambulance
default Trusts across 
defaultEngland
default.
default There is an understanding that these fines did in the first instance focus minds to deal with the issue of turning ambulances around within the agreed timeframe
default. However there is evidence to suggest that the fines are not actually being applied in a consistent manner across the areas, which in turn causes concern that the focus will drop away from turnarounds, as the consequences would not be realised and we will
default return to a position similar to that of 
defaultprevious years. 
defaultIt had been hoped that fines levied against acute trusts who were delaying ambulance turnarounds would result in that money being routed back to the ambulance trusts to allow them to put on extra amb
defaultulance capacity to compensate for those delays. There is very little evidence that this has happened which is disappointing.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultThe allocation of the additional £14M winter funding has had a very 
defaultpositive impact in supporting Ambulance Services this winter.
default This f
defaultunding was allocated during December 2013 which was very welcome. Predominantly the monies are being used to increase staffing on the front line to place more Emergency Ambulances on the r
defaultoad to respond to patients and maintain a safe, efficient and effective service. 
default&#xa0;
defaultHospital Ambulance Liaison Officers have also been increased to manage effective and smooth handovers at Emergency 
defaultdepartments
default; however this is the Ambulance Services investi
defaultng in these initiatives rather than the Acute Trusts.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe reasoning 
defaultbehind 
defaultthe
default division and 
defaultallocation of the £14m across the Ambulance Trusts was not clear, and some trusts received more funding than others, despite having already agreed additional winte
defaultr monies with their local Commissioners. Evidence of how these extra funds have been used may also help to influence the allocation of extra funding for next winter as previously mentioned.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;defaultNHS 111 may
default have also had a greater benefit on the wider health economy, had it been implemented fully in all areas to the original timescale, and been embedded fully before winter arrived, with the appropriate advertising undertaken.
default There 
defaulthas been a further
default realisation of the syner
defaultgy between the 999 and NHS111
default call centres with those ambulance services who run the NHS 111 service being able to influence
default and develop 
defaultin a more meaningful way the wider Emergency and Urgent Care 
defaultsystem, due to a greater
default understa
defaultnding of some of the problems being faced.
default Efficiency savings could be realised further from combining further 999 and NHS111 call centres in the future.
default&#xa0;
defaultWinter is 
defaultalways a very
default difficult time for 
defaultthe
default NHS, 
defaultbut
default it 
defaultcomes
default 
defaulta
defaults no 
defaultsurprise to us
default each year. There is considerable
default 
defaultlearning
default to be taken from
default the whole NHS system, to enable organisations to work more 
defaultclosely
default in dev
defaulteloping plans for winter 2014/15. There needs to 
defaultbe an
default early decision 
defaultnext year 
defaulton whether any additional funding will be m
defaultade available to both Acute Trusts and Ambulance 
defaultTrusts and
default recognition that the initial plan not to allocate monies specifically to ambulance trusts was flawed. It is clear that simply relying on local health economies to consider ambulance tru
defaultsts in thei
defaultr allocation decisions did not work despite ambulance trusts playing a full and active part in trying to influence those decisions. By ensuring that ambulance trusts receive direct allocations 
defaultearly, plans can be drawn together in a more evidence based, co
defaulthesive manner. This will further ensure 
defaultthe safety of patients, and optimum 
defaultefficiency of the services we provide. 
defaultAmbulance Services are 
defaultalways 
defaultvery keen to 
defaultplay an increasing part in the delivery of Urgent and Emergency Care and very much see ourselves 
defaultas part o
defaultf the solution going forward. We
default will continue to work closely with the review team led by Sir Bruce Keogh and NHS England to ensure we play a full and active part in achieving 
defaulta sustainable Emergency and urgency Care system in England.
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default