&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Lord defaultTriesmandefault (TWR0007)defaultWe as a family were among the Easy Jet customers in the North Terminal that day - got away late afternoon about 9 hours late. It was a grim experience especially with small daughter and the idea that either the airport 
defaultor airline had significant numbers of people on the ground is bizarre. If they were there they made a successful effort to make minimal appearances. 
defaultWhen moved from North to South and later back again, we organised keeping the group together ourselves. Ot
defaultherwise I'm very doubtful more than a handful would have finally got on the plane - one occasionally helpful guy from Lapland tour operator and a couple of young ladies from Virgin. Left to Gatwick or Easy Jet it would have been hopeless.
defaultIncidentally, whi
defaultle told to keep receipts for food (Qs way over 60 mins before they ran out of food, especially for people with eg gluten allergy which is common), no one has said where to send them. Phone calls have led to everyone pointing to someone else.
defaultFood, loos, bu
defaultses: defied belief. Especially as no one seemed to have thought about the numbers of small children inevitably there. I used to do air travel as Lords Minister so did feel I had a basic grasp of contingencies and have formed a view of 2nd runway idea. 
defaultIn 
defaultthe hearing one witness, I think from Easy Jet, said he had stood on a table and addressed the throng. I don’t know if it was him I saw but there was certainly an occasion when a man stood on a table in the Easy Jet area at the far end from where I was. I 
defaulthave no idea how many people were between him and me but a great number. Many were distressed and crying or shouting children. Around me, no one could hear him or had the smallest idea what he was talking about. I suspect that may have been true for most o
defaultf the large departure area through which wound the massive queue to the only functioning loo. There appeared to be a loud speaker public address system since it was playing an occasional loop saying how bad the weather had been. I was among many who could 
defaultnot understand why it was not used. I pity the guy who tried if that was the only resource at his disposal which would be hard to believe.
defaultIt is hard to describe the state of the loos in Departures but I haven’t really the language to describe those in Arr
defaultivals before they were closed. As I said, the queues were very long indeed. Like me, with a distressed four-year old who simply had to go, many parents took small children to the front of the queue and asked if we might go ahead. The adults were great and 
defaultrealised we had less control over events than they did. But the consequence was plainly that a number of adults waited still longer and were becoming distressed themselves. Two heavily pregnant ladies were letting kids overtake while I was there but were a
defaultlso in clear distress. Given the number of staff normally at the airport, I can’t believe there were no other loos and temporary access arrangements possible. If there are not, the airport is woefully unprepared for far more minor events.
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default