&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from defaultBrake, the road safety charitydefault (CYS0129)default&#xa0;defaultAbout BrakedefaultBrake
default is an independent charity working across the UK to make roads safer, prevent road death and injury, and care for road crash victims. Brake carries out research into public attitudes, experiences and behaviour in relation to road safety, disseminates inter
defaultnational research to road safety and fleet professionals, engages schools and communities to spread road safety education, runs public awareness and policy campaigns nationally and supports communities campaigning for road safety. It is also a national, go
defaultvernment-funded provider of specialist support for people bereaved and seriously injured in road crashes, running a national helpline and providing information packs that are handed to bereaved families by police following every road death.
default&#xa0;defaultFor more infor
defaultmation contact Ellen Booth, senior campaigns officer, on 
defaultebooth@brake.org.uk
default, t: 01484 559909, Brake, PO B
defaultox
default 548, Huddersfield HD1 
default2
defaultX
defaultZ
default&#xa0;defaultResponsedefaultIncreased levels of
default 
defaultcycling 
defaultand 
defaultwalking provide significant health, environmental, 
defaulteconomic
default, and community benefits
default, but r
defaultoad danger 
defaultposes 
defaulta major barrier to active travel. 
defaultBrake’s
default own research suggests 35% of people could be convinced to comm
defaultute by bike if ro
defaultutes
default were safer
default. 
defaultR
defaultoad dange
defaultr creates a barrier not only to people choosing walking and cycling as a transport choice to get from A to B, but also to people, particularly children and families, simply being able to ‘get out and about’ and walk and cycle in their neighbourhood for lei
defaultsure, exercise and social reasons. A 2012 Brake survey found many children are prevented from walking and cycling due to parents’ fears for their safety 
default.
default Conversely, studies 
defaultshow
default that where measures are implemented to offer greater protection and safe pa
defaultssage for people on foot and bike, it can lead to significant rises in walking and cycling
default,
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultIf the government and local authorities want to increase levels of cy
defaultcling, which is good for health and the environment, the
defaulty
default must make improving safety for v
defaultulnerable road users a priority.
default Brake argues that improving safety for cyclists and pedestrians goes hand-in-hand, and advocates a holistic and ambitious approach from government towards safer streets, communities and routes for walking 
defaultand
default cycling.
default&#xa0;
defaultEvidence shows that slowing 
defaultdown 
defaulttraffic makes cycling
default (and walking)
default 
defaulton roads 
defaultsafer
default. It also shows
default that the safest way to cycle is on a path segregated from traffic
default.
default 
defaultBrake 
defaulttherefore 
defaultrecommends
default that 
defaultin 
defaulttowns, cities and villages
default, traffic should be slowed 
defaultto 
defaulta maximum speed limit of 
default20mph
default 
defaultto allow people to get out and about and make journeys by bike and on foot
default (and by a combination of walking or cycling and public transport)
default. 
defaultBrake also calls for greatly increased provision of 
defaultdedicated traffic-free
default or se
defaultgregated
default 
defaultroutes
default 
defaultfor cycling (and walking), particularly on key routes linking residential areas with schools and colleges, places of work, shopping areas and leisure facilities, and linking neighbouring towns
default. Evidence from the Netherlands
default,
default London
default 
defaultand elsewhere 
defaultdemonstrate
defaults
default the effectiveness of these m
defaulteasures in reducing casualties 
defaultamong people on foot and bike. 
defaultOther studies have shown that effective implementation of area-wide 20mph limits, traffic-free routes, and other measures to make walking a
defaultnd cycling safer and more pleasant, can help bring about increased levels of walking 
defaultand cycling
default.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultBrake 
defaultbelieves
default 
default20mph is the most appropriate 
defaultdefault 
defaultspeed 
defaultlimit 
defaultfor
default 
defaultbuilt up areas 
defaultbased on the huge difference in stopping distances between 20mph and 30
defaultmph, and the overwhelming evidence on the direct relationship between speed and road safety
default and our belief that everyone should be able to walk or cycle without fear or threat to their safety
default. Evidence on implementation of 20mph limits shows they bring ab
defaultout reductions in devastating and costly casualties for pedestrians and cyclists in particular
default, have widespread public support
default, and encourage greater levels of walking and cycling
default.
default 
defaultBrake is part of a ‘
defaultGO 20’ coalit
defaultion of 10 charities
default who all believe 20mph is the most appropriate default limit for towns, cities and villages. U
defaultntil 
defaultwe achieve a lower default limit,
default 
defaultwe
default encourage more local authorities to follow the lead of Portsmouth, Bristol, London Borough of Isli
defaultngton and many others who have or are implementing widespread or town/city
default/area
default-wide 20mph limits.
default&#xa0;
defaultAlongside calling for 20mph limits, 
defaultBrake recommends the use of segregated and traffic-fr
defaultee paths as widely as possible on key routes as outlined above. 
defaultBrake
default warns that simply marking a cycle 
defaultlane
default on otherwise normal roads, 
defaultespecially
default busy
default, fast
default 
defaultroads with
default hazardous junctions, does not constitute provision of a safe route. 
defaultBrake 
defaultrecommend
defaults
default continuous cycle 
defaultpaths,
default safe along their full length, including sa
defaultfe negotiation of busy and complex junctions, and using segregated and traffic
default-
defaultfree routes as much as possible, or where not possible making use of quiet
default roads with lower speed
defaults.
default 
defaultThere should also be a partnership approach taken 
defaultby
default local authorities and po
defaultlice to en
defaultcourage implementation of accompanying 
defaultmeasures 
defaultto
default make these routes safer
default where they are on or crossing roads
default, particular
defaultly
default 20mph limits, and wider enfor
defaultcement
default, including through use of technology like average speed cameras for urban areas.
default&#xa0;
defaultHowever, b
defaultecause it is not possible to have 
defaultsafe, 
defaultsegregated routes connecting every 
defaulthome with
default 
defaultschool
defaults
default, 
defaultworkplace
defaults
default and college
defaults
default, 
defaultit remains vital to lower our
default urban limit to 20mph, 
defaultto make whole 
defaultareas
default safer for cycling. 
defaultMaking cycling and walking the 
defaultautoma
defaulttic choice for shorter journeys
default requires that people feel familiar and comfortable with walking and cycling
default in their immediate local area
default. 
defaultM
defaultaking
default whole
default communities welcoming for walkers and cyclists, rather than simply providing safe routes from A to
default B, will encourage people to get more active in their leisure time
default. By 
defaulthelping people to feel more confident and comfortable walking and cycling in their immediate local area for leisure and very short journeys
default, people
default (including children) are more able t
defaulto
default build up the fitness
default, 
defaultskills 
defaultand confidence 
defaultnecessary to undertake other journeys like commuting on foot or by bike
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultI
defaultf children are to be brought up with walking and cycling as the normal way to 
defaultm
defaultake short journeys, they need 
defaultto be able to
default walk and c
defaultycle for 
defaultschool and 
defaultleisure purposes
default,
default to get used to those activities safely
default. 
defaultChildren are safer where traffic is 20mph or slower, 
defaultand
default where they can travel and play 
defaultaway from traffic entirely, such as
default on traffic-free routes
default and spaces
default. Children are not o
defaultften allowed to choose how they travel to school
default, but if their local environment is safe
default, they are more likely to be allowed to travel actively and play outside
default, making them
default more likely to 
defaultbe
default fit and healthy, and more likely to choose active travel for th
defaulteir shorter journeys when they are older
default.
default In this way, 20mph limits and traffic-free routes are also important in allowing children to practice and get used to active travel.
default&#xa0;
defaultBrake argues that to bring about desired improvements in walking and cycling, w
defaulte need a bold and determined approach from central government that ensures progress is made across the country, rather than a piecemeal 
defaultlocalised 
defaultapproach where it is left up to local authorities to decide the level of priority they give this issue and what measures they implement. This should include lowering our urban default limit to 20mph, rather than leaving it up to authorities to decide wheth
defaulter to implement this evidenced and important measure, and to go to the expense of extra signage and other measures needed when switching a limit from the default. It should also include not only provision of additional funding for 
defaultlocal authorities to impl
defaultement 
defaultsafe walking and cycling facilities
default like traffic
default-
defaultfree routes
default, but a requirement placed on local authorities to develop 
defaultthe network of safe
default routes and reduce risk for people on foot and bicycle. 
default&#xa0;
defaultFinally, long-term change in the safety 
defaultand extent 
defaultof 
defaultcycling 
defaultneeds to include awareness-raising and engagement work, geared at 
defaultdrivers 
defaultin particular but also cyclists 
defaultand potential cyclists. Research from Norway
default and the UK
default demonstrates that initiatives to increase levels of active travel and improve road s
defaultafety are much more effective where they include educational and enforcement component
defaults
default. On the basis of this research, and our years of experience campaigning in road safety locally and nationally, we recommend 
defaultthe government
default undertake
defaults
default to educate 
defaultthe pub
defaultlic
default not only about the benefits cycling brings and steps cyclists can take to reduce their risks, but also, critically, the importance of 
defaultdrivers 
defaultprotecting cyclists
default and their responsibilities in doing so
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default 
defaultBrake and Bolt Burdon Kemp survey of parents on cycling, 2012
default Brake and 
defaultBolt Burdon Kemp survey of parents on cycling, 2012, and Brake and Churchill survey of parents on walking, 2012
default Where widespread 20 limits have been introduced levels of walking and cycling increased by 20% 
defaultCitywide Rollout of 20mph speed limits
default, Bristol City Council Cabinet, 2012
default Makin
defaultg the Case for Investment in the Walking Environment, University of the West of England and Living Streets, 2011
default Grundy, C., Steinbach, R., Edwards, P., Wilkinson, P. Et al.
default “default20 mph zones
default&#xa0;defaultand Road Safety in London” Report for Transport for London, 2009
default Beca Infrastructure Ltd, “
defaultResearch Report 389 Cycle Safety: Reducing the Crash Risk”, October 2009
default Kraay, J. H., “Woonerfs and other Experiments in the Netherlands” 
defaultBuilt  Environment
default  12  (1986)  1/2  :  20-29
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultGrundy, C., Steinbach, R., Edwards, P., Wilkinson, P. Et al.
default “default20 mph zones
default&#xa0;defaultand Road Safety in London” Report for Transport for London, 2009
default Where widespread 20 limits have been introduced levels of walking and cycling increased by 20% 
defaultCitywide Rollout of 20mph speed limits
default, Bristol City Council Cabinet, 2012 
default Speed and Road Safety: Synthesis of Evidence from Evaluation Studies, Transportation Research Board of the National A
defaultcademies, 2006 (http://trb.metapress.com/content/mv484245r1x4343m), and The effects of drivers’ speed on the frequency of road accidents, Transport Research Laboratory, 2000 (http://www.trl.co.uk/online_store/reports_publications/trl_reports/cat_traffic_an
defaultd_transport_planning/report_the_effects_of_drivers_speed_on_the_frequency_of_road_accidents.htm)
default 
default20mph speed reduction initiative, The Scottish Executive, 2001 (http://shcs.gov.uk/Resource/Doc/156487/0042012.pdf), and  20mph Speed Limit Pilots Evaluation
default Report, Warrington Borough Council, 2010 (http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&amp;rct=j&amp;q=warrington%2020mph%20limits&amp;source=web&amp;cd=6&amp;ved=0CFcQFjAF&amp;url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.warrington.gov.uk%2Fdownload%2Fdownloads%2Fid%2F2362%2F20mph_pilot_scheme_full_report&amp;ei=Xugf
defaultUNbQGsPJhAftoYDAAQ&amp;usg=AFQjCNFe9T4rvAQWNmn7KDLmlMPcficbLA&amp;cad=rja)
default British Social Attitudes Survey, 2011 (http://assets.dft.gov.uk/statistics/releases/2011-british-social-attitudes-survey-attitudes-to-transport/bsa-2011-report.pdf)
default Bristol City Council found a mean increase of 23% in walking and 20.5% in cycling Bristol City Council, 2012 (https://www.bristol.gov.uk/committee/2012/ua/ua000/0726_7.pdf)
default Pucher, J. and Buehler, R., ‘Making Cycling Irresistible: Lessons from the Nethe
defaultrlands, Denmark, and Germany.’ 
defaultTransport Reviews
default, 2008.
default Zlot, A. and Schmid, T, ‘Relationships Among Community Characteristics and Walking and Bicycling for Transportation or Recreation’ 
defaultAmerican Journal of Health Promotion, 
default2005.
default Understanding Walking
default and Cycling, Lancaster University, 2011.
default Brake and Bolt Burdon Kemp survey of parents on cycling, 2012, and Brake and Churchill survey of parents on walking, 2012
default Timperio, A., Crawford, D., et al. ‘Perceptions about the local neighbourhood and walkin
defaultg and cycling among children’. 
defaultPreventative Medicine
default, 2004.
default Phillips RO,
default&#xa0;
defaultUlleberg P
default,
default&#xa0;
defaultand 
defaultVaa T
default., “
defaultMeta-analysis of the effect of road safety campaigns on accidents”, 
defaultAccident Analysis and Prevention
default 
default2011 May;43(3):1204
default-18
default Chorlton K,
default&#xa0;
defaultConner M. “
defaultCan enforced behaviour change attitudes: exploring the influence of Intelligent Speed Adaptation.” 
defaultAccident Analysis and prevention
default, 2012 Sep;48:49-56
default