&#xa0;
defaultJustice
default Committee
defaultOral evidence: 
defaultThe work of the Criminal Cases Review Commission
default, HC 971
defaultTuesday 14 January 2014
defaultOrdered by the House of Commons to be published on 
default14 January 2014
defaultWritten evidence from
default:
defaultCriminal C
defaulta
defaultses Review Commission
default&#xa0;
defaultWat
defaultc
defaulth th
defaulte
default meeting
defaultMembers present:
defaultSir Alan Beith (Chair), Steve Brine, Mr Christopher Chope, Jeremy Corbyn, Gareth Johnson, Mr Elfyn Llwyd, Andy McDonald, John McDonnell
default&#xa0;
defaultQuestions
default 
default1–
default39
default&#xa0;
defaultExamination of WitnessesdefaultWitnesses:
default 
defaultRichard Foster CBEdefault, Chair, Criminal Cases Review Commission, and 
defaultKaren Knellerdefault, Chief Executive, Criminal Cases Review Commission, gave evidence.
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultMr Foster and Ms Kneller, welcome. The fact that you were slightly delayed was of assistance to us because we were just completing some earlier business, so you need not worry about that. We are grateful to you for coming in this morning. We have thought for some time that we would like to have an introduct
defaultory session with you. This might
default lead to our exploring further any issues that come up. We have not launched an inquiry into the commission, but it is a body we feel
default that
default we would like to get a better understanding of. I ask Mr Corbyn to begin.
defaultQ1 default&#xa0; 
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default 
defaultWelcome. Thank you for coming to give evidence to us this morning. 
defaultA
defaults someone who was deeply involved in both the 
defaultBirmingham
default and the 
defaultGuildford
default cases, which eventually led to the establishment of the commission
default, I am really pleased you are here
default. Do you feel that over the years it has had sufficient independence and sufficient clout to carry out the work envisaged at that time to address miscarriages of justice?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: 
defaultI
defaultndependence
default and clou
defaultt, 
defaultyes. Money is in short supply. Pressure of resources is really the biggest inhibitor on our work. We have had some 15,000 applications since we were set up. We have reviewed in depth roughly 5,000 of them. To date, we have referred back to the courts 
default540 cases 
defaultin which the 
defaultconvicti
defaulton 
defaultwas
default quashed. This year—to December—
defaultwe have referred 24 cases to be quashed. Yes, I think we have the independence. Yes, I think we have the clout, subject to the
default issue of our section 17 powers, which
default I hope
default the Committee may want
default t
defaulto come on to 
defaultlater.
defaultMoney
default really has been tight. We 
defaulthad a period, from 2008-09 u
defaultntil this year, in which we
default had no increase in funding at all, so in real terms our budget is 25% less than it was in 2008-09; austerity came to us rather early.
default This year we have had a slight increase in funding of £450,000, in recognition of the fact that our volume of applications has gone up by 75% in the last couple of years. Obviously that increase—which is an increase of about 8% in our budget—is nothing like
default enough to cope with those
default additional volume
defaults
default.
defaultQ2 default&#xa0; 
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default Do you feel that over the years since it was established there has 
defaultbeen 
defaultan increase or a decrease in public confidence in the criminal justice system?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: It is very hard to say. What we have seen is a remarkably steady level of applications to us and miscarriages of justice identified by us. In those terms, the poor are always with us, as it were
default. W
defaulte have seen very little variation until, as I said, the last year or so, when we have seen a surge in applications, on the back of work we have done to increase accessibility to the commission. As to whether there is greater or less public confidence in the criminal justic
defaulte system, I honestly do not think
default I am the best person to answer that question.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: One o
defaultf the things we can say
default is that part of our role is to provide a quality assurance system within the criminal justice system. We try to keep the system clean, if you like. It is a difficult question for us to answer, but I think we do play a role in trying to enhance confidence in the system. As the chairman said, we have many cases coming to us, in the majority of which we do not think there is a particular issue. As you know, only a small proportion of cases are referred back to the appellate courts.
defaultQ3 default&#xa0; 
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default What would you say have been the main achievements in contributing to reform and improvements in criminal law in this country?
default In your view, what case law or other improvements have 
defaultthere 
defaultbeen as a result of your work?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Let me take the
default most current example—
defaultasylum and immigration cases
default, of which we are now seeing a very considerable number
default.
default If you will forgive me, I will take a moment to paint the picture. Parliament has legislated, quite rightly, to say that if you attempt to enter this country with a false passport—or a genuine passport that is somebody else’s—you co
defaultmmit a criminal offence. That was
default to stop what had become quite a developed set of criminal activity, with criminal gangs transiting peopl
defaulte here in that way. But a
defaultt the time it legislated
default,
default Parliament also offered a statutory defence, which is that if you are genuinely fleeing from persecution, perhaps in fear of your life, and you come here an
defaultd
default present yourself—
defaultQ4 default&#xa0; 
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default 
defaultWas that in the 1987 Act?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. In that case, you have a statutory defence. So you would expect that when people presenting pre
defaultcisely those features came here
default they would not be prosecuted. What we have actually found—there are some really shocking cases—
defaultis that when people have come here
default the case has been 
defaultlooked at first by UKBA, then in
default the police station, then by the defence lawyers and then by the Crown Prosecution Service, but nobody has spotted that these individuals have a very clear statutor
defaulty defence. Instead t
defaulthey have been advised to plead guilty and, naturally, have been convicted.
default To put it at its highest, people who have been coming
default from countries where the British Government do not recognise a legitimate Government
default,
default and
default who
default logically
default, therefore,
default could not have had a legitimate document from the country they came from
default,
default have 
defaulteven so 
defaultbeen convicted.
defaultTo date, we have referred 14 such cas
defaultes in the last couple of years; 
default12 of the convictions have already been
default quashed. We have about 80 that are current. I will be very surprised indeed if there are not many hundreds more yet to come f
defaultorward. I have
default spoken to 
defaultthe DPP about it. We are 
defaultin discussion with the defence B
defaultar
default and with
default some of the solicitors’ regulatory authorities, because there may be issues about 
defaultpeople simply not doing their
default job. If you look at all of that, it is not simply that the individuals concerned have been convicted when they should never have bee
defaultn prosecuted in the first place; t
defaulthe cost w
defaultill have been enormous. T
defaulthere will have been publicly funded defence, publicly funded prosecu
defaulttion, the cost of the trial and
default,
default if people have been incarcerated, the cost of all of that, so you are talking about the waste of very considerable sums of money. That is an example of a class of miscarriage that we spotted that is really relatively new. On the back of quite a bit of activity to publicise what has been going on, I hope we are in the process
default of putting a stop to it—
defaultalthough not entirely. The most recent conviction we are dealing with is from January last year, so this is quite a current problem.
defaultQ5 default&#xa0; 
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default In any
default case, isn’t that the fault of lawyers 
defaultfor
default not advising peop
defaultle that that is a mitigation 
defaultdefence?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. That is the primary cause.
defaultQ6 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default In your earlier answer,
default you were modest about public confidence, which may well be appropriate, but it is actually in your mission statement that you want to enhance public confidence in the criminal justice system. Presumably you have to have some way of dipping the dip-stick into the tank from time to time and establishing whether you are succeeding in that objective.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: We do not run any sort of survey or go through any process of that kind to give us an independent assuran
defaultce. O
defaultne way of looking at it would be this. About 90% of the applications that we get are from Crown court convictions—serious convictions, not just convictions in the mag
defaulti
defaults
defaulttrates
default. Although that is 90% of the applications that we receive, it is only 1.2% of Crown court convictions, so only a very small percentage of people convicted in the Crown court come to us. 
defaultOf those, w
defaulte decide that about 97% or 98% of the cases we look at are perfectly safe convictions, with no grounds for referral, so the percentage of cases that we refer
default as potential miscarriages is
default a very small percentage of a very small percentage.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ7 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default I am not
default really
default sure that 
defaultanswers the question. A layman’s view of public confidence would be that it is about whether people generally believe that the justice system is fair. That belief is made up from a whole variety of things, but one of them is the confidence that if injustices have occurred there is a good working p
defaultrocedure that 
defaultdeals with them. That is what you
default try to do, but p
defaulterhaps one should know whether this is having any impact
default or whether other
default forces or
default factors are still undermining public confidence by more than you can improve it.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Karen may want to say something in a moment. When I worked as chief executive of the CPS and was a member of the National Criminal Justice Board, the Home Office and
default the
default DCA, as it then was, ran very extensive public confidence su
defaultrveys. I would love to be in a
default position to do the same sort of thing in the CCRC. We are a very small organisation.
default W
defaulte have 80 staff in total—that is it. I have no sort of policy or research capacity whatsoever. I do not want to present a tal
defaulte of woe, but
default,
default if you are a case
defaultwork organisation and 
defaultyou have queues
default,
default the 
defaultpressure to deliver on the case
defaultwork and to deal with t
defaulthe next potential victim
default of miscarriage tend
defaults
default to drive out more or less everything else.
default That is why many of the things that we would like to do to feed back more into the criminal justice system
default have been rather squeezed.
defaultQ8 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default Maybe what you actually need is some analysis done of material that is available elsewhere, through research conducted by others more generally into the criminal justice system and the public perception of it.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: I suppose it depends on who t
defaulthe public are; a
defaults you were saying, there are various groups. In the last few years
default,
default we have done an awful lot of work on improving access to services, so very many more people and various groups of people can access us. That is a public confidence point. We do much more stakeholder engagement. A lot of that is with academic institutions and research. We are chipping away, if yo
defaultu like, but as the chairman 
defaultsaid, we 
defaultwere
default very much a firefighting organisation, focusing on the front
default-
defaultline casework. 
defaultIt is
default right to do so, but increasingly we are turning to address those issues.
defaultQ9 default&#xa0; 
defaultSteve Brine:default Thanks for coming in. Can we turn to the triennial review? I noticed from our notes that you underwent your first triennial review in 2012-13. It came up with a series of recommendations. Have you entered into what you would call a constructive dialogue with the Ministry of Justice since those recommendations came out? Was an update provided in October, as required?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. There has been a
default very constructive dialogue. Our
default review
default was positive, on the whole; w
defaulte came out green in most areas. There was very strong support from stakeholders for the continuation of our work and for its being done in the form in which it is done now—that is to say, by a public organisation. There are really three outstanding points from the report. The first was around the role of the chairman and the chairman’s powers in assessing commissioners and—
defaultQ10 default&#xa0; 
defaultSteve Brine:default They described it as wanting a more defined leadership role for the chair.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. That has been discussed and agreed already, so 
defaultit
default is done. The second issue was around governance. The recommendation was for a smaller and more balanced board, in line with best practice el
defaultsewhere. That is something 
defaultwe have not yet discussed as a commission; we are due to discuss it the week after next.
defaultQ11 default&#xa0; 
defaultSteve Brine:default On the 28th.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. Why not sooner? As you may be aware, the chair was in the process of being reappointed.
defaultQ12 default&#xa0; 
defaultSteve Brine:default Y
defaultou were reappointed just before Christmas.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: I was reappointed at the beginning of November. The commissioners felt that it was right to pause on that discussion. We are due to discuss it. The point at issue is that
default,
default on the one hand, pretty well anybody would agree that the best way of running an organis
defaultation is to have a small board—mainly non-execs—
defaultholding the executive to account, but we are a c
defaultommission. The commission is our
default st
defaultatutory body, so to speak. T
defaulthere is a tension between those two things that we hope to resolve.
defaultThe third issue, since you have given me the opportunity, is section 17, where the triennial recommends—
default&#xa0;
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultWe will come to that.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Then I will stop.
defaultQ13 default&#xa0; 
defaultSteve Brine:default Ms Kneller, does a smaller board work for you? I am sure the more defined leadership role for the chair works for the chair, but does the smaller board work for you? Does that make sense? Did you agree with the triennial recommendations?
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: The recommendation is a reflection of what is understood to be good corporate governance. We know that that changes over time. For us, the challenge is how we overlay that on a commission model. We need to have those discussions. One of the other reasons why there has been a little bit of delay is that not only was the issue of the chair’s appointment in the air but we have also recently had the appointment of five new commissioners. Somehow it did not seem appropriate to deal with something so fundamental when virtually a third
default,
default if not half
default,
default of the board was just about to walk through the door.
defaultQ14 default&#xa0; 
defaultSteve Brine:default Why did it take a triennial review? If it was good governance and good practice, why did it take a new Government implem
defaultenting triennial reviews of 
defaultnon-departmental public bodies for you to do that? Why did 
defaultyou not proactively do it
default yourselves?
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: We have done a great deal of work over the last three or four years on refining our governance arrangements. For example, we have moved to a more structured committee system, so we started the process some time ago. We have to remember that it is a commission model
default, and 
defaultwith that the
defaultre are certain challenges. We started the process—i
defaultt is just that the path we 
defaulttravelled along has coincided with the recommendations from the triennial review. It has all come together at about the same time.
defaultSteve Brine:default Good luck on the 28th.
defaultQ15 default&#xa0; 
defaultJohn McDonnell:default 
defaultLike Jeremy, I was one of those who campaigned for the establishment of the CCRC. I chaired the Guildford Four committee, so I re
defaultcognise the need to be able
default to have a separate review of the way cases are handled. To be frank, I am anxious about your overall performance and whether you are living up to the expectations of the royal commission in the first place. One key factor is obviously the budget, t
defaulto which you referred earlier. With regard to the 
default2013-14 settlement
default, do you think you 
defaulthave sufficient to fu
defaultlfil your
default remit? With regard to a future-
defaultyears settlement, what discussions 
defaultare taking
default place now? Are you confident that you will secure sufficient resources to fulfil your remit?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: We are very grateful to the Ministry of Justice for increasing our money in 2013-14. As
default I said, it is the first time 
defaultit
default has happened for a long time, so we are grateful for that. In order to get rid of queues, which is what I would like to do, I need about another £1 million. Our budget at the moment is £5.1 million; we need about £6 million. With £6 million, I could say to you, “Come back in a year or 18 months’ time and you will not have to wait six and a half months, if you are in custody, or nine months, if you are not in custody, before we start reviewing your case.”
defaultThe other thing that would be extraordinarily helpful would be some certainty about funding over more than a 12-month period. When we recruit people, we are required first to look across the civil service at anybody at risk. That takes about a month. We then have to offer our posts to the civil service more generally. That takes another month. Only then can we go to the market
default. If we go to the market, 
defaultfair 
defaultand open competition 
defaulttakes two or three months, so altogether it is four or five months. We cannot actually start somebody with us until they have cleared security vetting, because of the very sensitive nature of some of the material that we hold. Currently that is taking the MOD three months. So from being given the money, however fast we run, it will take me at least six months to get that person in pos
defaultt. I then have to train them—
defaultseven, eight or nine months. If I have only 12 months’ funding, I could lose them again. Given the period of time I have them for, the cost of going through that process year after year after year is quite high, so more money would be good.
defaultCan I come back to the point about the royal commission and whether we have lived up to the expectation? I will say two things. First, the number of cases we have referred has remained remarkably constant throughout the period that we have been in existence—
default&#xa0;
defaultQ16 default&#xa0; 
defaultJohn McDonnell:default What is it in percentage terms?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: About 3.5%
default of the cases that we handle.
defaultQ17 default&#xa0; 
defaultJohn McDonnell:default How does that compare with the previous days before your existence
default, with regard to
default the Home Office referrals?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: In the first couple of years of our existence, we will have referred as many cases as the Home Office dealt with in the entirety of its existence.
defaultJohn McDonnell:default As a percentage as well as in—
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Absolute numbers.
defaultJohn McDonnell:default Yes.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: In fairness to the Home Office, we have investigative powers that 
defaultthey
default did not have. We have m
defaultore money than they
default had. T
defaulthe essential point—
defaultit i
defaults a point that Runciman made—
defaultis that what we do is 
defaultchallenge the courts and the legal system. 
defaultI
defaultf 
defaulton occasion 
defaultwe refer a case, the
default court has to hear it, so we are one of the very few bodies in the country that can actually tell the courts what to do. Runciman took the view that there was quite a fundamental constitutional point—that it was wrong for that sort of power and authority to sit within the Home Office. It had to be separate from
default the E
defaultxecutive.
defaultThe other point that I would like to make is that recently we had Professor Michael Zander, who was on the original Runciman commission, at a stakeholder
default event. Until recently
default he was the president of Innocence UK. We asked him to give an assessment of whether or not he thought we were living up to the original remit of the royal commission. He said very clearly that he did. He thought we were
default,
default and that we were operating in precisely the way that was envisaged.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ18 default&#xa0; 
defaultJohn McDonnell:default Just to get clarity on the numbers, is the percentage of referrals in relation to applications higher under the CCRC than under the Home Office?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes—much higher
default. I do not want to get too technical, but the way we measure our performance is this. Our referral rate is a percentage of the entirety of the applications that we get. At the moment we get 
default1,600 a
default year; it is 3.5% of 1,600. The applications that we get will include people from foreig
defaultn jurisdictions and civil cases, and a
defaultbout 40% of the applications that we get will be from people who have not already appealed to the Court of Appeal. If I were to look at our referral rate as a percentage of the cases that Parliament intended us to look at—that is to say, people who have been all the w
defaultay through the process
default—it would be about 7%, a
defaultbout the same as in Scotland.
defaultQ19 default&#xa0; 
defaultJohn McDonnell:default On the figures, in 2012-13 the commission completed 351 fewer cases than it received. That was the same the previous year. Are you content with that level of performance? As well as the additional £1 million, which I am taking as read, what aspects are you looking at to improve performance?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Of course I am not content with it. Please bear in mind what was going on then: when we improved our arrangements for accessibility, our level of applications jumped from a long-term historic trend of 
default900 a
default year to 1,600, so it increased by 75%. Not surprisingly, because we were getting so many more applications in, even though we were getting better at concluding cases
default,
default we were not getting better fast enough to cope with that level of new applications.
defaultQ20 default&#xa0; 
defaultGareth Johnson:default Can I ask you about some of the immigration, asylum and human trafficking issues you touched on earlier? I think you said—if I understood you correctly—that it was 1.5% of the cases, and that in 90% of those cases you found that there was no miscarriage of justice, so you were looking at only a small number. Do you expect that number to increase in future years, or do you think it will stay pretty static?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: I think there is a large stock of cases that have not yet come forward. First, we are talking about people who are foreigners coming to this country and 
defaultwho 
defaultwill therefore be more vulnerable. Secondly, they were advised by their own defence lawyers to plead guilty. They tend not to read the 
defaultLaw Society Gazette
default or other publications of that kind, so reaching out to that group of people and identifying them is our biggest problem. That is why we are
default talking to the CPS about how they
default can help, why we are running articles in the 
defaultLaw Society Gazette
default, 
defaultand 
defaultwhy we have been talking to all the charities in the field and so on. I would guess that on asylum and immigration, as opposed to human trafficking, there is a large stock of cases yet to come forward.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ21 default&#xa0; 
defaultGareth Johnson:default You mentioned again that the
defaulty were advised to plead guilty—p
defaulterhaps I should say that I am a criminal defence lawyer by trade. What evidence do you have that they were so advised? Have they said to you, “My solicitor or my barrister advised me 
defaultto do that?” O
defaultr is it simply that they pleaded guilty and you then found a defence that they should perhaps have run when it came to the trial? You may be right. I am not 
defaultchallenging what you are saying; 
defaultI am just trying to identify where you have come to that conclusion from.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: When we start a review, the first thing we do is pull together the various papers, if they are available. Typically, we would have the transcript from the court case, the transcript from the appeal case and any advice that was given on appeal. We would have the defence files, subject to any issues about confidentiality, the prosecution file
defaults and the police files. We 
defaultlook at the documentation, and “advised no section 31 defence” will be there in the solicitor’s notes.
defaultIn fairness to lawyers operating in this area, there are a number of technicalities. Was the individual in fact continuously fleeing during that period? If they transited from 
defaultSomalia
default to 
defaultKenya
default, for example, how long were they in 
defaultKenya
default? Might they reasonably have made an application in 
defaultKenya
default? If so, the section 31 defence might not apply. It is not a simple black
default and 
defaultwhite issue, so you can understand why sometimes mistakes were made, but when I say that they were advised to plead guilty
default,
default I am absolutely certain that their defence lawyers advised them to plead guilty.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ22 default&#xa0; 
defaultGareth Johnson:default Obviously this whole area is quite worrying. There are issues here. People who have been exploited and are in a very vulnerable situation have ended up being criminalised, when clearly that should not have been the case. Are you getting any kind of help with this from the legal profession? Is the Law Society helping at all? Is the Bar Council giving you any assistance to try to flush out the extent of the problem?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: We have had a lot of assistance. The Court of Appeal has made its views clear. We have written to the resident judges and have been in discussion with the Law Society and with CALA, the defence lawyers’ association. We have run articles in the 
defaultLaw Society Gazette
default. Yes, we have had a lot of support. Everybody is keen to fix this.
defaultQ23 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultCan I turn to one of the most fundamental things about your work, which is the test you have to run in order to establish whether to refer a case to the Court of Appeal? I suppose people might assume that the test is, is it likely that this person is innocent of the charge of which they were convicted? It is not, of course. It is section 13(1) of the 1995 Act, interpreted i
defaultn Pearson and other cases, and
default might be argued to be a rather subjective test—what will the view of the Court of Appeal be on the basis
default of what we put in front of them
default? That may include evidence, or it may include process issues
default,
default such as an unfair summing-
defaultup by the judge or some unfair element in the trial. Some people see that as making you, in a way, not independent of the Court of Appeal but rather predictors of the Court of Appeal’s view. What is your feeling?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: As you point
default out, it is a statutory test, so it is the test we have to apply. Once the decision is
default taken that it must be for the c
defaultourt to decide whether or not to uphold or quash the conviction or change the sentence, it follows that in thinking about a referral, in effect, you have to pu
defaultt yourself in the minds of the c
defaultourt and say, “Are there any grounds here tha
defaultt I think would count with the c
defaultourt?” 
defaultOtherwise, i
defaultf you do not do that—if that is not the test that you are operating—you are at risk of sending to t
defaulthe c
defaultourt a lot of cases that they 
defaultwill simply bin.
defaultYou are right to say that it is not always the easiest, but I think it is the best test. Although people have criticised it from time to time, I have never heard anybody suggest an alternative test that would work better. I would certainly argue very strongly against some sort of innocence test, because demonstrating that a conviction is unsafe is a much lower hurdle than demonstrating evidence, once somebody has been convicted, that they are actually innocent or that it is probable that they are innocent, so I would want to stick with that.
default              
defaultThe prediction is difficult. Of course, we have two Courts of Appeal, for Northern Ireland as well as for England and Wales. The Court of Appeal is three judges, and it is a different combination on each occasion, so there can be a sort of penumbra, if you like. The view I have always taken
default,
default and pressed very strongly within the commission and publicly
default,
default is that if we are in the grey area
default,
default we should always refer. I would not want ever to be in a position of saying, “We will pause on doing that because we are not quite sure
default.” I think it is right for the c
defaultourt always to have the option of saying that this referral should never have been made—
default&#xa0;
defaultQ24 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultHave they
default done that very often?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Not in those terms.
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultNot in so many words.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Not in so many words. We are sometimes reminded that a case we have referred is an extremely old case, slightly with the words hanging, “Why have you done this?”
default,
default but it has not been more direct than that.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ25 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultIn a way, it is doubly subjective, because the Court of Appeal is trying to establish whether, if presented with 
defaultthe information you present them
default with, which may include new evidence, a jury would have come to a different conclusion.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: I think things
default are moving on. These days the c
defaultourt is less likely to consider the jury impact tes
defaultt, and 
defaultis now more minded to look at the evidence and form 
defaultthe c
defaultourt’s
default own view, rather than try to second-guess what the jury might have done.
defaultIf I could touch on the independence point, it is an easy accusation to level that 
defaultyou are not independent of the c
defaultourt, 
defaultbut I think that sometimes perhaps it is
default levelled b
defaulty people who do not read all 
defaultthe judgments the c
defaultourt issues. If you read them closely, sometimes you can see the raising of a judicial eyebrow every now and then. I think we have a constructive but critical friend-type relationship with the Court.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: To date, we have referred only one case more than once—the case of Stock, which we have referred twice. I think the Home Office sent it back as well. We will refer at least one more case for a second time within the next few months. I would not be at all surprised if it is more than that.
defaultOf course, it is a two-way street. When we were set up, the remit of the commission was entirely to look at cases and, if necessary, to refer them to the Court of Appeal. For several ye
defaultars now, the Court of Appeal have
default had the power to ask us to look into cases. That is quite a lively area of business for us as well.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ26 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultHave you had many cases referred to you by the Court of Appeal?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. This is nearly always around jury issues—jury tampering, allegatio
defaultns of juries being subverted or
default inappropriate internet access by the jury. We had a case recently—Joof—which started as a referral by the Court of Appeal because of issues around the jury. When we looked into it, and on the back of a whistleblower coming forward, we had concerns about very significant issues indeed around non-disclosure by the police force acting in the case. To cut a long story short, five convictions were quashed and there is now a separate investigation into the police force and the senior officers con
defaultcerned on the back of that. T
defaulthat is quite a big area of activity. Michael Creedon, working for the IPCC, is now carrying forward the second investigation, involving, I think, five or six officers of ACPO, including chief constables.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ27 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultOne of the areas of difficulty you have had to deal with is historic sex offences, where there are quite a number of people who are adamant that they have been wrongfully convicted. This includes particularly those who have been picked up by a trawling process. Has section 13(1) prevented you from investigating some of these cases because you did not think that they engaged the section 13(1) test?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: No, that is not the problem. The problem is the lapse of time. Quite a number of these cases can be from 20 or 30 years ago, so you are talking about someone who was an adult—perhaps in their 40s—30 or 40 years ago
default,
default and an accusation by somebody who was then a child. When we are looking at the case 30 or 40 years on, that adult is now perhaps into their 80s. The people who were their contemporaries at the time, if we can trace them at all, may be deceased or unwell. If you are talking about, say, a care home, that care home may long since have gone out of business; the records may no longer exist. In a sense, it is linked to 13(1) because you have to find something new in order to put your case to the Court of Appeal, but the real problem, as with any old case, is finding any of the evidence at all, including things such as the original court transcripts.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ28 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultOf course, in many of these cases, those who are pursuing them will take the view that a lack of evidence on the prosecution side demonstrates that the case is not made out against them and might not at a later date have
default been treated in the sa
defaultme way, and that in some cases they were convicted before it became clear that there might have been excessive 
defaultuse of similar fact evidence or
default that police information about times and dates when people were in particular institutions did not tally. That would, of course, constitute new evidence, if there was documentary proof of it.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: From memory, we have had 47 applications of that kind. We have referred four, in three of which the convictions were upheld; the other one is still pending.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ29 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultDo you anticipate dealing with more cases, either because you have them now or simply because a lot more historic sex offences are being brought to light?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Not only that, but you can see a pattern that repeats. Society almost stumbles upon a new class of offence or realises that it is more extant than had previously been thought. One looks at what has happened on the back of Jimmy Savile, for example; suddenly there is a very large exercise. Of course, what can happen in a situation like that, when there is very considerable public interest or press scrutiny and a lot of intense pressure on the prosecution team to get results, is that innocent p
defaulteople can be swept up in it. We
default see that pattern repeated on a number of occasions. So yes, we will see more of that.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ30 default&#xa0; 
defaultAndy McDonald:default Good morning. I know you have been chomping at the bit to talk about section 17, so 
defaultperhaps 
defaultthis is your chance. As I understand it, section 17 allegedly gives you the power to require a public body to produce documents. I wonder whether you are having any difficulties with that. I am thinking in particular of the 
defaultShrewsbury
default case at the moment. Does that present any problems, despite the power being there? Of course, a lot of these public functions are now in the hands of private bodies, and we are transferring ever more. There seems to be a glaring need to extend that legislation to private bodies. Have you had any indication from the MOJ as to whether that is to be pro
defaultgressed? If so, is it going to
default be soon?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: They are supportive and have
default said that it will be progressed once a suitable legislative vehicle is available. That is something that well-meaning officials have been telling us since 2006, I think. You are precisely right. A large number of bodies that were public bodies have either moved to the private sector or are in the process of doing so. They are bodies whose information is vital to our inquiries—the forensic science service, probation, parts of the police and parts of the health service. If we are looking at issues 
defaultlike
default the reliability of a witness, it is absolutely essential that we have these records.
defaultThe section 17 power—that is to say, the power to obtain private as well as public documents—is a power that the Scottish CCRC has had since its inception. 
defaultThey do it in 
defaultthe way we would feel comfortable d
defaultoing it as well—
defaultby way 
defaultof application to the court. I
defaultt would not just be us saying, “We want to see a document that is held by a private organisation
default”
default;
default 
defaultit would be the court saying that. That change would be the biggest single thing that would help us.
default              
defaultComing back for a moment to public organisations, it is true that sometimes public organisations are a bit sticky as well. Perhaps surprisingly, the bodies that you might think would be stickiest, such as the security services and military intelligence, tend to be the most co-operative, once they have been assured about our ability to maintain appropriate security around the documents. We do have a difficulty with some of the public bodies, but we get there. What this costs us is time.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ31 default&#xa0; 
defaultAndy McDonald:default In the context of private organisations, if you are making those requests and do not have the ability to compel, has that caused frustrations to the process in real terms?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes. For example, it took us a year to obtain some documents
default, which
default were vital to an inquiry
default,
default from a charitable organisation working in the criminal justice field that is funded almost entirely out of public funds.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: Without doubt
default,
default the lack of this power means that we can spend many, many months—even a year or longer—negotiating access to material that is held in the private sector, by a private individual or by a charity. Sometimes the negotiations are successful and we get the material, but sometimes they are not suc
defaultcessful, so we are left with an issue of “W
defaulte don’t know what we don’t know
default.”
default We do not know whether that material might have tipped the balance one way
default or the other. As the chairman 
defaultsaid, without doubt that power would mean that we would be able to progress cases more quickly, because of the time and the expense involved in carrying out these negotiations. We would feel more assured that we had an overall picture by having receipt 
defaultof that information. As I 
defaultsaid, sometimes we simply do not get it; some bodies simply refuse.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ32 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultHave you ever been at the point where the refusal or failure to provide, even after persistent attempts, has impaired your ability to decide whether to refer a case.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: Yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ33 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultThat has happened.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: Yes.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ34 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultClearly that is not acceptable, is it? It is an issue that we will pursue with Ministers.
defaultKaren Knellerdefault: Thank you.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ35 default&#xa0; 
defaultAndy McDonald:default Can I move on to two specific issues? The briefing refers to the commission’s concern about the accessibility of its services to particular groups that are underrepresented in the 
defaultcase intake. The easy r
defaultead format is a measure that is aimed at overcoming this. How effective has it been in increasing the uptake of services by other groups? Have you any other initiatives addressing the needs of other groups—for example, women and young people—and how successful have they been?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: We came at this by looking at the profile of our applications and reflecting on the fact that if you looked at the profile of people in prison—the demographic—there was a big difference. For example, there are a lot of young men in prison but we got relatively few applications from young men. That is what sparked us off on this. When we looked into it further, we realised that there were a number of groups—young men, women
default,
default people
default with learning disabilities—who
default were clearly badly underrepresented.
defaultWe took our then application form, which I have brought with me, to a prison. We talked to the prison staff and said, “What do you think of it?” I have been a civil servant all my life; I ran the benefit system for a while, and I promise you that by civil service standards this f
defaultorm wa
defaults a model of clarity, compression and simplicity. Prison staff we showed it to just laughed. They said that prisoners with an average reading age of 11 or below, and a similar writing age, simply would not be able to fill in that form because of literacy and numeracy issues.
defaultIn addition to that, when you look at people who have other sorts of disadvantages, a diffe
defaultrent sort of form that we call easy r
defaultead, which mixes pictures and words—it is not just that the words are simpler; there are also pict
defaultures—is a much 
defaultbetter way of doing these things. That is what we were told. There was a bit of snootiness about all of this, because when you look at the pictures, you think, “Those are a bit naff.” When we started sending out the forms, not only did we get an explosion of applications—a near doubling—but we rapidly discovered that
default,
default if we sent people
default both forms
default, even people who were highly literate
default an
defaultd numerate preferred using the easy r
defaultead form. We then discovered, having talked to some psychologists about all of this, that one of the reasons for that is that people find this format, with the pictures and the flow diagrams, less judgmental, so they are more prepared to talk about exactly what their crime was—what the
defaulty did and all the rest of it—so
default you actually get more information out of it.
default&#xa0;
defaultAt one level, we are very pleased about it. At another level, I am rather irritat
defaulted about it, because I think, w
defaulthy did it take
default us
default so many years to work out that if most prisoners struggle with reading and writing, say
defaulting, “
defaultIf you want to apply to us, write us a lengthy and detailed letter,” is probably not the best way of r
defaultunning the business
default?
default It has been a considerable success in those terms. It has also been quite cheap, I am sure you will be pleased to know. Basically, the costs were scissors 
defaultand paste. We got nearly all 
defaultthe advice about how to do it either from voluntary organisations 
defaultlike
default Mencap
default,
default or from the Department of Health. It was done entirely by a single member of staff in the organisation, Cathy 
defaultDilks
default, who has done really well on this.
default              
defaultWe are now planning to do more; we are in the process of doing a whole stream of things. If you want to make a complaint about us, there is an easy read complaint form. There are easy read posters. In order to manage the huge increase in volumes of business, we are now seeking to do a lot more work at what we call in the jargon the front end of the business—in prisons. As well as working with other organisations, we have our own staff going out there to run workshops with prison staff and things like that
default,
default in order to t
defaultry to manage the process and ensure that we get all 
defaultthe applications that we need, 
defaultbut 
defaultnot a huge volume of applications that are clearly never going to go anywhere.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ36 default&#xa0; 
defaultAndy McDonald:default That is a fascinating answer. The whole purpose of documentation is actually to put people off, 
defaultnot to be successful like that—
defaultdisability living a
defaultllowance being a case in point.
defaultFinal
defaultly, can I look at some issues about
default the website and branding? I know you have to
default migrate to the 
defaultgov.u
defaultk site, and
default I think you have concerns that that undermines your independence and you are seen as part of the machine. Are you continuing to press for a reconsideration of that decision?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: We are continuing to press. Every arm’s length body will say, “We’re different,” “We need a distinct brand,” and all the rest of it. The point for us is that the people who apply to us feel that they are the victims of the state. That is what they feel. They feel they have been prosecuted by the CPS—
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default They are not wrong about that.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: If they are going to apply to a body like ourselves, they need confidence that they are applying to a genuinely independent body. When I say that we need an independent website, it is not because I want to take my 80 people and sit in a little corner on a 
defaultsandcastle with a flag saying “I
defaultndependent
default”
default;
default 
defaultit is because
default if I am going to get people to apply to us, they need to have the confidence when they do so that we are independent, not 
defaultjust of the E
defaultxecutive but also of the court system. That is why we want it.
defaultIf working in this integrated system had been a resounding success, I might be a bit quieter, but
default,
default because other people are now doing it
default,
default we have had out-of-date policy advice and guidance—our policy advice and guidance, but the wrong stuff—put on the website. We have had press releases that we have put out go on to the website and just disappear. We are getting an increasing number of phone calls from all sorts of people interested in other aspects of the wo
defaultrk of the Ministry of Justice: b
defaultecause we are one of the few parts of the system that actually put their phone number on there, they ring us. It is not just that we want to be independent—it is just not working very well. It would cost of the order of £10,000, if not less, to change it. I am not talking about a huge IT system here—I am talking about a very small sum of money.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ37 default&#xa0; 
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultSome of us run our own websites at much less cost even than that.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Indeed.
defaultQ38 default&#xa0; 
defaultJohn McDonnell:default I am worried about the organisation and its performance. I have dealt with Susan Hill, for example, who was once referred—
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Susan May.
defaultJohn McDonnell:default I am sorry—Susan May, who died before she could be cleared.
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: Yes, tragically.
defaultJohn McDonnell:default Some of the people in the Shrewsbury cases are now getting elderly. Just to sum up your organisation at the moment, there is a shortage of resources and a lack of powers. My concern is that that will draw the organisation into debate about the credibility of the organisation overall. What is your comment on that?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: The Susan May case, of course, is a case that we reviewed and referre
defaultd to the Court of Appeal, but they
default upheld the conviction. We then had a furth
defaulter application for
default Susan May and re-reviewed the case, but we could not find anything new over and above the new things that we had already found. The rules of the game are that
default,
default once you have referred a case, if you want to re-refer it you need something new over and above. We are now re-reviewing the case again. I know it has taken a long time and I regret that. We went to the leading expert on fingerprinting for some advice. Unfortunately, perhaps because he was the leading expert and everyone was therefore going to him, it took a very long time for him to come back to us. I regret that. We are close to a conclusion on the Susan May case. Since we are close to a conclusion and it is live, I cannot say anything more than that.
defaultOne of the things I want to do in my next fi
defaultve years as chair—apart from secure additional resources, get section 17 and 
defaultaddress the website—is to strengthen the public voice of the organisation, because I do not think it has occup
defaultied the public space; 
defaultthat was your very first question, Sir Alan. That is one of the things I am determined to do over the next five years.
default&#xa0;
defaultQ39 default&#xa0; 
defaultJeremy Corbyn:default Is there an opportunity for the Ministry of Justice or anyone else to review your work during the five years, or are you now secure for five years in terms of how the organisation operates?
defaultRichard Fosterdefault: I am expecting another triennial review in about two years’ time. We are spending public money. It is absolutely legitimate for the Ministry of Justice to test us really hard on how we run the business. Should more work be done by staff as opposed to commissioners? How efficient are your IT systems? That is absolutely legitimate and I welcome it, because it keeps us on our toes. Where it crosses a line is if it touches on our independence. I do not think that quizzing me about performance and effectiveness touches on that, but I know when my independence is threatened and I know what to do about it if I ever get a challenge of that kind.
defaultSir Alan Beith (defaultChairdefault)default:default 
defaultI think we would like to know as well if your independence is threatened. Thank you very much, Mr Foster and Ms Kneller, for your help this morning.
default&#xa0;
defaultOral evidenc
defaulte: 
defaultThe work of the Criminal Cases Review Commission, HC 971
default              
default15
default&#xa0;
default