&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence from Alex Sully (CYS0137)defaultCycle proofing, cycle audit and the need for the training of professionalsdefaultAlex Sully is consultant with 27 years’ experience of providing for cyclists through planning, designing 
defaultfor 
defaultand promoting cycling. His past experience includes being a member of the English Regions Cycling Development Team and as a consultant to Cycling E
defaultngland as part of its Professional Advice Team. The latter team
default, including Alex,
default gave advice to local authorities in England across a range of policy, infrastructure and promotional issues. As part of his responsibilities he 
defaultalso 
defaultwrote much of Cycling Engl
defaultand’s technical guidance and has contributed to DfT 
defaultprimary 
defaultguidance as well as writing guidance 
defaultand policy 
defaultdocuments for local authorities
default here and in Ireland
default.
defaultHe is well known as a Continuing Professional Development (CPD) registered trainer with clients
default at home and abroad that have included 
defaultDfT, DOT Ireland and
default 
defaultlocal authorities. Overseas training has been undertaken for an Italian university, EU funded information exchange programme and Irish 
defaultand Polish 
defaultlocal authorities. He is also the author and tutor
default for the UK’s only distance learning course (at Master’s level) in the field of designing infrastructure for cyclists.
default1.1
default              
defaultThe undertaking of Cycle Proofing / Cycle Audits 
defaultis
default an essential way 
defaultof ensuring
default that 
defaultany
default changes to the highway network are not only safe for cyclists
default but, where possible, positively 
defaultencourage more people to cycle more often. 
defaultThere is already DfT supported guidance on this subject and no more is need, just its application.
default1.2
default              
defaultSuch audits sho
defaultuld not be combined with Safety Audits as their objects are not the same. Safety audits confine themselves only to issues 
defaultof safety 
defaultand are not obliged to identify ways in which 
defaultschemes
default can be improved to achieve the key objectives of Cycle Proofing/Audits
default. An example is highlighted that shows that other countries have made such procedures mandatory and if not followed can put the future of a scheme into jeopardy.
default 
default1.3
default              
defaultThe submission includes a case study which seeks to explain to the committee why the abse
defaultnce of such procedures leads to unsafe schemes. It suggests that the issues highlighted could be avoided through the creation of a properly trained workforce that knows about 
defaultand 
defaultfollows best practice. This situation can be addressed by encouraging authori
defaultties to increase the skill levels of their staff
default through suitable training
default.
default1.4
default              
defaultFinally, the submission sets out an easily adopted principle of how such audit procedures and training could be funded
default from scheme costs without too great a burden on an indivi
defaultdual project thus ensuring value for money. Again, an overseas example of where this is applied is included.
defaultThis submission recommends the following:
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe undertaking of a Cycle Audit should be adopted by the industry as best practice f
defaultor all changes to the highway network (Safety Audits are not compulsory for the local road network but are seen as an essential part of scheme development to ensure user safety);
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe government should inform all local highway authorities that it expects th
defaultis practice to be adopted even if this fall short of compulsion;
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe government should inform local highway authorities that it expects that the costs of Cycle Audits should be met from individual project costs
default;
default
default&#xa0;&#xa0;&#xa0; 
defaultThe government should inform local highway a
defaultuthorities that they may meet the costs of raising the skills of their staff from scheme costs
default, both capital and revenue,
default where the training demonstrably 
defaultcontributes
default to the delivery of best practice 
defaultth
defaultrougho
defaultut
default those schemes.
default&#xa0;
default3.1
default              
defaultImproving the
default 
defaultquality
default 
defaultof local roads
default 
defaultthrough 
defaultthe introduction of 
defaultsuitable infrastructure 
defaultand the reduction of the volume and speed of traffic 
defaultis 
defaultwidely
default accepted as a key 
defaultpart of
default 
defaultdelivering
default a safe, cycle-friendly environment. Whilst it may 
defaultnot 
defaultalways be 
defaultpossible
default to retro-fit solutions into 
defaultsome 
defaultexisting streets, there are few reasons why new roads and 
defaultother 
defaultchanges to the highway network should not be made as cycle-friendly as possible.
default3.2
default              
defaultThis process has recentl
defaulty become 
defaultknown
default as ‘Cycle P
defaultroofing’. However, in 1998 a perfectly suitable means of achieving this was set out in the 
defaultDfT supported 
defaultC
defaulthartered Institution of Highways and Transportation
default 
default(CIHT) 
defaultdocument ‘Cycle Audit and Review’. Sadly, very few highway authorities took up its recommen
defaultdations. It is generally accepted that t
defaulthis was because Cycle A
defaultu
defaultdit became associated with the Cycle R
defaulteview process (a means of establishing levels of service
default for cyclists
default)
default. This 
defaultwas considered by many to be overly resource intensive and hence, expensive
default. 
defaultAs a consequence many did not look more closely at Cycle Audit and its benefits
default.
default3.3
default              
defaultSome 
defaultlocal 
defaultauthorities have responded b
defaulty creating their own checklists. S
defaultometimes combined with 
defaultpedestrian audits or full non-motorised user audits (NMUs) which include th
defaulte needs of those with mobility impairments as well as equestrians. A number of the latter have been drawn up but again have not 
defaultalways 
defaultbe
defaulten 
defaultfully employed because of the perception that they are too time consuming to implement. As an indicator, many of the
default associated documents amount to hundreds of pages.
default3.4
default              
defaultA number of authorities have gone a differen
defaultt route and incorporated their Cycle A
defaultudit procedure
defaults into their Safety A
defaultudits. At first sight this might seem a laudable approach, however, it is most 
defaultempha
defaulttically
default not.
default The reason is
default simple: they are two entirely separate processes and should be performed as such. 
defaultIn common with a Cycle Audit a Safety A
defaultudit is a structured process
default. However, it
default looks only at the safety aspects of changes to the 
defaulthighway. It is 
defaultnot obliged to offer suggestions as how the highway might be improved as a means of encouraging more cycling.
default 
defaultWhilst this may ensure 
defaultcyclist safety
default,
default it does not achieve the key objectives of 
defaulta Cycle Audit which is to look at
default the scheme to “ensure that oppo
defaultrtunities to encourage cycling are consider
defaulted
default and that cycling conditions are not inadvertently made worse”.
default Opportunities might include exempting cyclists from a banned turn or road closure. 
defaultS
defaulttop
defaultping
default conditions becoming worse 
defaultmight involve i
defaultntroducing a s
defaultignal controlled junction instead of a roundabout on a route on which cycling is to be encouraged
default. This solution would 
defaultremove a disincentive to cycling and
default improve cycle safety
default.
default3.5
default              
defaultOn the basis that Cycle Proofing 
default/ 
defaultAuditing is a good thing, how do we get
default it adopted by local authorities? At present there is no compulsion and decisions are left to local authorities. This is in contrast to Ireland where the government, through its Department of Transport, has seen fit to tell highway authorities (Circular RL
defaultR 16/2008) that it expects NMUs to be undertaken for changes to the non-national roads
default “funded or co-funded by the Department”
default. It goes 
defaultfurther
default than simply asking, the circular states “Should the … procedure not be 
defaultfollowed this may result in delay or 
defaultwithdefaultdrawal of funding for the schemedefault” (bold text in original document).
default 
default3
default.6
default              
defaultThe UK government may think it has offered words of encouragement that will change highway authority’s attitude to this subject. In the press release ‘Government shifts cycling up a g
defaultear’ issued by the DfT on 12
defaultth
default August 2013 is the statement “The announcement includes a commitment from the government to cut red tape that can stifle cycle-friendly road design and to encourage changes to the way roads are built or altered. Councils will be expected to up their game 
defaultto deliver infrastructure that takes cycling into account from the design stage.” However, in the same press release the prime minister is 
defaultpersonally quoted
default as saying “New trunk road schemes that have a significant impact on cyclists, such as junction impr
defaultovements or road-widening, will be ‘cycle-proofed’ so they can be navigated confidently by the average cyclist.” Unwittingly he has given local authorities a ‘get out of jail free’ card here since this only applies to the national road network and not the 
defaultlocal one
default. Whatever the intention of this statement, in times of cut backs, 
defaultsuch wording 
defaultwill inevitably be
default scrutinised and used by some as a reason for inaction.
default4.
default1
default              
defaultR
defaultather than try to 
defaultfurther 
defaulta
defaultrgue the pros and cons of undertaking such processes
default,
default the need 
defaultfor proper scrutiny of changes to the road network is illustrated by the following case study. The purpose of this study is to highlight how easily the absence of informed auditing resulted in 
defaulta hazardous scheme and 
defaultadditional 
defaultcost to the community at large.
default It is only fair at this stage to point out to the Committee that the author of this paper was an objector to this scheme with the objections based on extensive 
defaultprofessional 
defaultexperience of des
defaultigning for cyclists at home and abroad.
default4.2
default              
defaultIn 2011 a new road was opened close to the centre the county town of 
defaulta shire county
default. This project was funded from government capital funds and developer contribution. During its gestation 
defaultperiod 
defaultobjections were r
defaultaised at the planning approval stage on the basis that elements of the scheme were unsafe for cyclists. 
defaultAt that time it was pointed out that t
defaulthe authority 
defaulthad not chosen best practice by not undertaking a cycle audit. The council rebutted this by claiming 
defaultthat its inclusion in the safety audit was an adequate approach
default. 
defaultThe objections were not taken on board at that time. 
defaultFurther objections were raised at the formal 
defaultland acquisition stage and this resulted an inquiry 
defaultdetermined
default through written representation
defaults.
default Again, the objections were not upheld.
default 
default4
default.3
default              
defaultThe objections presented 
defaultset out
default a number of safety concerns
default. It also pointed out that the needs of cyclists were not considered as part of the schemes development with no mention of their number and desire li
defaultnes in the supporting traffic assessment. This was considered important by the objector since 
defaultthe town’s
default urban wards boasted over 9% journeys to work by bicycle in the 2001 Census. It was also known to impact upon existing cycle routes which linked to such destinations as a secondary school, a further education college and the town’s hospital, all of which a
defaultre recognised as cycling destinations. In the absence of any analysis of their needs, any 
defaultstatement that the scheme in any way met them 
defaultcould not be considered as valid.
default4.4
default              
defaultFor the benefit of any members of the Committee who are not regular cyclists the e
defaultlement of the scheme that gave rise to the greatest concern over cyclist safety surrounded 
defaultthe design of 
defaulttwo cycle lanes. As designed and first built
default,
default cycle lane
defaults
default w
defaultere
default included that required cyclists to give way to any vehicle that crossed their path to tu
defaultrn left at a junction. Best practice contained in DfT guidance is to continue the lane to inform motorists that they may be crossing the path of cyclists going straight ahead
default; this was brought to the inspector’s attention
default.
defaultGood practice
default:
default cycle lane takin
defaultg cyclists ahead
default - 
defaultLTN 2/08
default DfT
default4.5
default              
defaultAs can be seen from the picture below, what was built was hazardous to cyclists as they could not be sure what other traffic was doing whereas, if built 
defaultaccording to best practice
default,
default 
defaultthere would be no such confusion.
default 
defaultIn
default this picture the van is not indicating and it is impossible to determine its intention
defaults 
default(it went straight ahead) 
defaultfrom its position
default leaving cyclists vulnerable to collisions with turning traffic
default4
default.6
default              
defaultWithin ten days of opening, the authority realised the n
defaultature of the problem and put in place the solution below.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultNot a good practice solution but at least cyclists and motorist know what’s going on
default4
default.7
default              
defaultAs mentioned above
default, there were two such examples, both of which were addressed within ten days of opening.
default 
defaultRegular cyclists will understand just how dangerous the original design was and one has to assume that the changes 
defaultmade so soon after opening 
defaultwere the response of the authority to the evident danger posed by the original design.
default 
defaultThere still remain several 
defaultcycle safety issues that still give rise to local cyclists concerns that have not been addressed but could have been resolved through a Cycle Audit without additional cost or delay.
default4.8
default              
defaultSince there was only one objector to the scheme it can be concluded th
defaultat it was unnecessarily delayed as the result of the authority’s unwillingness to listen to the concerns of cyclists and revise its original designs. It is also the conclusion of the author that this situation would not have arisen had those involved in th
defaulte design been properly trained and aware of the needs of cyclists
default. There were also unable to deliver
default change
defaults to the road network that make
default life better for them in line with the authority’s claimed objectives of promoting 
defaultcycling as a 
defaultsustainable mode of tr
defaultansport. It should com
defaulte as no surprise to the C
defaultommittee that this
default authority has seen its levels of cycling to work fall by a third from a creditable 9.3% in 2001 to a disappointing 6.3% in 2011
default (Census figures)
default.
default It is the author’s opinion that the fact tha
defaultt the inspector also failed to identify the hazard created does not say much for his level of understanding.
default5
default.1
default              
defaultAs mentioned in the author’s description he has experience of training planners, engineers and students across Europe.
default Clients have included the UK’s DfT, Ireland’s DOT, Universities and local authorities at home and abroad. The latter include recently successful bidders for the Cycle City Ambition Grant. This experience leads him to the conclusion that there is still a s
defaulttrong need and unsatisfied demand for training amongst p
defaultrofessionals of all disciplines. In addition, the evidence of the case study above suggests that some authorities ‘don’t know what they don’t know’ and as a result feel no need to 
defaultacknowledge their sh
defaultortcomings or 
defaultraise the level of their staff’s skills to meet best practice in ensuring the safety of cyclists.
default5.2
default              
defaultProbably the biggest barrier
default 
defaultto training is the level of cut
defaultbacks in 
defaultlocal authority 
defaultrevenue funding. Personal experience suggests that one area which falls victim in such circumstances is an authority’s training budget. In the recent past the author raised this issue with the then Minister for Transport, Mr Norman Baker. During their conv
defaultersation Mr Baker expressed 
defaultthe view that it was “entirely compatible” with its objectives to use monies from the Local Sustainable Transport Fund to ensure that those delivering projects funded in this way are fully trained in best practice. He was, of co
defaulturse referring to the revenue element of the fund and also made the point that local authorities should be transparent in their activities. It is suggested that this principle could easily be extended to 
defaultother
default projects, whether revenue or capital funded. T
defaulthis approach has been adopted by the Irish government which permits the costs of audits to be charged to the “applicable grant scheme” (Circular RLR 16/2008).
default Of course, such costs can also be spread across a number of schemes so the burden would not be di
defaultsproportionately great for one project.
default5.3
default              
defaultThe CIHT’s approach to Cycle Audit recognises that the process should be tailored to the scale and scope of each individual project
default. This means that
default the costs involved should not be prohibitive and hence, a reaso
defaultn for non-adoption. The important issue with all such audits is that the right questions are asked of the right (suitably tra
defaultined) people at the right stage
default. This means that it should not
default, in itself, create a procedural 
defaultor cost 
defaultbarrier to a scheme’s progre
defaultss. Funding audits and training in the manner suggested would create a culture in which those auditing will share their (trained) understanding
default 
defaultwith other members of the planning and design teams and thereby achieve real value for money and a better inform
defaulted workforce.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
defaultPage 
default2default of 
default9default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default