&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultW
defaultritten evidence from 
defaultWystan
default Palm
default (CYS0142)
defaultWystan
default Palm
defaultAs a person who has been cycling in cities and urban areas sinc
defaulte I started cycling to school 20
default years ago, I would like to submit my personal views on what issues to consider. The brevity of my submission does not reflect on the lack of thought that I have given to the matter or the level of importance I attribute to it.
defaultI am not going to attempt to
default properly reference the claims I make in this evidence, I have no doubt that there will be plenty of properly referenced material provided by various cycling advocacy organisations. This is a quick collation of my views that has built up over many years of
default reading articles, blogs and studies about cycling for the purpose of presenting a view of how cycling policy should proceed.
defaultI think the first consideration should be, what do we really want to achieve for cycling in our cities? Cycling has a numbe
defaultr of advantages
default, most obviously
default:
defaultOver and above these specific points, would it not be wonderful if people of 
defaultall ages and abilities felt safe using a bicycle to travel the many fairly short journeys we undertake across our cites?
defaultI have been a keen cyclist since just about as early as I can remember. I started cycling the 7 miles to school when I wa
defaults 14 and haven’t looked back since. I’ve never been a sport-loving person but cycling was always something I enjoyed and being able to combine exercise with transport has given me both the motivation and also the occasion to keep fit and healthy. I probabl
defaulty owe my good health, now that I’m in my mid thirties, 
defaultin part 
defaultto the decision I took in secondary school to take
default a pair of wheels
default to the 
defaultsuburban roads and town streets between my home and school.
defaultI have cycled in Manchester where I lived for many years a
defaultnd now cycle frequently in London, where I live currently.
default I will focus mainly on London in this document, as that is where I feel  a massive improvement is easily achievable.
defaultCycling remains an excellent means of transport around small 
defaultcites. We Brits live on a small island and so many journeys are less than the 5 miles that just about anybody could manage to traverse on a bicycle. So many of my friends and acquaintances tell me that they would like to cycle and are thinking about purcha
defaultsing a bike except for their worry about safety. I speak to them a year later and they are still thinking that they’d really like to be able to ride but the niggling concern about safety has still held them back from actually making a purchase.
defaultIf so many 
defaultpeople want to cycle, why are we so spectacularly failing to capture this and translate it into real change on the street?
defaultCycling, even in London, according to the statistics
default, casualties from cycling are actually quite low
default. The fatalities
default per mile of journey are actually slightly lower than for pedestrian journeys. Of course cyclists undertake longer journeys than pedestrians 
defaultso it’s not quite as simple as all that but no-one ever questions the idea of walking to the tube stop. However, wh
defaulten I mention that I cycle in London, people’s eyes widen with concern for my safety. The reaction can be one of respect that I am prepared to take that risk, or one of 
defaultannoyance at my do-gooding.
defaultSo if cycling as actually safe, what is there to worry about
default? Firstly, most of the cyclists I know in London are quite experienced. To be able to cycle in the London traffic, you really have to have your wits about you. So statistically, cycling comes out as quite safe but would I be happy to let someone I care abo
defaultut loose on two wheels on London’s roads? Well, I’d certainly have to think about it. I’d probably start to give them some safety tips, at which point, they would probably decide it doesn’t sound that great after all and give it a miss.
defaultWhether cycling in 
defaultcities is safe or not, the real or perceived danger is the primary reason I hear for not taking up the activity.
defaultI should be clear, I l
defaultove cycling in London, it gets m
defaulte around from place to place most often faster than I 
defaultcould via any other form of transport. The experience is nonetheless incredibly frustrating, because there is a constant sense that it could be so much better. Better in a way that means that it would appeal to a wider group of people, not just fanatics li
defaultke me. Here are just a few of the frustrations and dangers that I encounter while riding:
defaultI’m riding home up Finchley Road, NW2 (the only alternative is a less busy but hilly route through Hampstead). 
defaultI’m ridi
defaultng in
default the bus lane, uphill
default, 10 miles per hour
default. There in front of me is a car, parked in the bus lane: this is presumably legal at this time of day. I look over my shoulder to check for traffic behind, there’s a gap, I pull out 
defaultinto the next lane, far enough to 
defaultavoid an opening car door. A car 
defaultapproaches me from behind and what seems me like above the 40 mile an hour speed limit. It breaks and beeps at me, I get the sense that the driver is thinking ‘what the hell are you doing here in my lane? Why can’t you ride
default closer to the parked cars? I’m trying to get home from work.’ 20 seconds of impending road rage later, I clear the last of the 12 parked cars and pull 
defaultin and the driver tears past me.
defaultIf we’re serious about cycling in our cities then we must make it possi
defaultble to ride on these major arteries. To get from Marble Arch to Golders Green, I don’t want to be diverted up and over Hampstead hill; I want to go this way. While my experience enables me to traverse this journey somewhat safely, it is not a pleasant expe
defaultrience – the traffic is approaching me from behind on a road that is built in a way that says ‘this road is for cars, drive at speed here’.
default This is central London
default, Zone 2
default. The traffic should be cruising at a safe speed – red routes should not be excluded f
defaultrom the 20mph initiative.
defaultHere is a
default second example from 
defaultthe same road. I am riding up Finchley Road and I find that the A41 bears of this road to the left. Two lanes of high-speed traffic bear of in this way, meaning that I must
default be in the outside lane just to continue straight. There is not an opportunity to get into this lane anywhere approaching this junction; the traffic is travelling too fast. I complete my journey. I must pull into the centre of the road about 800m prior to 
defaultmy junction
default. In parts, drivers undertake me without switching lanes leaving less than a foot between my handlebars and their wing mirrors.
default Sometimes I take the centre of the lane and I get beeped at a lot but fewer people try to squeeze past me without swi
defaulttching lane.
defaultThis is not a motorway; it is my way home. I am allowed to ride here and the road should be built as if that’s been considered.
default The two lanes bear off because that enables motor traffic to continue through the junction without having to slow d
defaultown too much but this is at the expense of smaller road users who j
defaultust end up like a fish out of water.
default This
default 
defaultis central London, Zone 2
default:
default I should be able to ride on this road without being made to feel like I’m out of place. 
defaultIt
default’s a Saturday afternoon and I’m taking a relaxing ride on the Regent’s canal: it’s a shared space now, “two tings” that’s the policy. So I slow down to walking pace as there are a few people around. I ting because the person in front of me is walking in th
defaulte centre of the path and I don’t want to startle them. “Ting me again and you’ll end up in the canal mate” comes the reply.
defaultThis is one of the few places where you can cycle in London and really switch off. It’s interesting that cyclists are the object of 
defaultaggression both on and off the road.
defaultI should caveat the above stories with the fact that so many drivers are courteous. I am eternally grateful for even basic allowances made for cyclists
default like not driving into the back of me and slowing d
defaultown to give me the space to pull out. I’m sure that with some thought we can change both the design of roads and the attitude of other road users to make cycling safer and more enjoyable.
defaultThere are a number of steps that I think could
default be taken to raise the profile of cycling and get more people out on two wheels while reducing casualties.
defaultThere are too many roads through London that have that ‘dual carriageway’ feel that encourages drivers to speed along as if they’re driving on a by-pass. The problem is, they’re not on a by-pass, they’re driving through the centre of London. Most people ar
defaulte responsible in their behaviour and adjust such as to fit with what seems to be appropriate to the surrounding environment. My example of Finchley road is just one of many like this: Euston Road is another. The pedestrian barriers along the side of the ro
defaultad send a subconscious message to pedestrians that this is a dangerous road and the traffic is travelling too fast to think about you. No wonder no one wants to be on the other side of the barrier on a bicycle. I’m all for it being a red route, then no-one
default can stop in the bus lane but let’s make it feel like a road in the middle of a city where there are pedestrians and cyclists all over the shop so you’d better slow down and pay attention.
default I accept that it’s going to be difficult to make Finchley Road feel
default like Exhibition Road but at the moment the layout seems to be making the road seem like the domain of cars and that is going to make it more dangerous for more vulnerable road users and feel even more so.
defaultI’ve heard the phrase ‘
defaultsmoothing traffic flow’ bandied around. Whenever I’ve dipped into the detail of this it seems to mean 
defaultredesigning junctions so that motor traffic can continue through without having to slow down so much. Surely this is the opposite of what we want, 
defaultjunctio
defaultns are where many of the casualties occur, the traffic should be disrupted at these junctions alert to other road users not smoothly cruising through.
default20 mile-an-hour speed limits are cropping up all over the place. This is great: it really gi
defaultves roads a completely different feel, both as a cyclist and a pedestrian. More like that please. Why not just go the whole hog and apply it to anywhere in the congestion charging zone? That would be so simple. If we’re serious about getting ordinary peopl
defaulte cycling, then it’s time to do something that would really make a difference. Not a patch of blue or green here
default or there
default but something that will really make a massive di
defaultfference to safety for cyclists
default and pedestrians and change the 
defaultfeel of the roads.
defaultI have mixed feelings about this one. I’ve ridden places where it has been fantastic to ride in a truly traffic-free environment. Taking the Regent’s Canal on my way to work early in the morning has brought me to work having actually enj
defaultoyed the relaxing journey rather than being adrenalin fuelled.
defaultThere is a valid argument that if you want to get large swathes of the population cycling, then that can only be achieved by providing segregated space where people feel safe. On the other 
defaulthand, this is going to be a fairly major overhaul of the road network and that is going to take time. There are plenty of other steps that we can take immediately that would have a massively positive effect.
defaultIt is also important that if more and more segre
defaultgated lanes are built, that this doesn’t mean that cyclists are always expected to use them. Cycle lanes brilliant if designed well and if the journey the cyclist is attempting to make is one that was considered in the design. Often though, the lanes can b
defaulte a massive inconvenience where cyclists find they have to give way far more than the main stream of traffic. If you’re taking your journey really slow and you do not have the energy today to mix with the traffic then that works out just fine. However, if 
defaultyou want to make your way round a 5 exit roundabout without having to give way 6 times then you’re better off on the road. 
defaultThat said, having the option of choosing a traffic-free route has lots of benefits and something that we should be working on, just 
defaultnot at the expense of more immediate solutions. For cycling to be a feasible means of getting f
defaultrom A to B there will inevitably
default be a point where it is necessary to traverse the road network.
default In order for cycling to be a viable means of transportation, the 
defaultroads will have to be safe for bicycles.
defaultNearly all of the near-misses I have had as a cyclist have been when drivers have performed unnecessarily dangerous manoeuvres around me. A greater emphasis on how to allow for cyclists could easily
default feature as part of a driving test. Simple things such as leaving enough room when overtaking would make a massive difference to the experience of cycling. While this is mentioned in the Highway Code, it is not something that is generally considered import
defaultant to do.
defaultAs someone who has been cycling for a long time in the urban environment, I have learned a lot about how to stay safe and much of it is unintuitive. There are some really good advanced cycling courses around and these could be 
defaultpromoted further to give more people the skills to be able to tackle city roads.
defaultCyclists are a target of a great deal of abuse. Mentioning cyclist inspires so much venom in so many people and there is much misinformation in the public disc
defaultourse. It might be cheaper to run a series of awareness raising television campaigns to encourage better tolerance of cyclists than to start rearranging the tarmac.
defaultThese have taken a lot of stick recently with a few fatalities on one o
defaultf the routes. I still think that they are actually a great idea. They aren’t about safety directly but just about saying, ‘this is a major route, there might be cyclists using it too’. That’s an important message but it must be accompanied with more measur
defaultes such an enforced no parking zones so cyclists don’t have to weave in and out of the traffic.
defaultThis has been a great way of allowing people to discover cycling in the city, sometimes so much so as to decide to buy a bike and start doing it more
default regularly. For me, the most effective way of making cycling 
defaultsafer is simply to get more people doing it so that it becomes normalised and something that is taken into consideration when driving.
defaultThese are great, more please. 
defaultLet’s get the mirrors and the sensors on them right now. I do feel that they probably shouldn’t be driving right into London, not when they’re that big. The rush-hour ban definitely warrants consideration.
defaultFor me, the vision of cycl
defaulting for the future should be one where people of all ages and abilities feel that they can cycle safely from door to door. This, particularly in a place where the city is so tightly packed as London, means using the road. There are plenty of achievable thi
defaultngs that can be done in a short timescale such as introducing speed limits, and some longer term possibilities such as redesigning roads to encourage safer behaviour. Segregated space is desirable in some situations but should not be hailed as the one answ
defaulter to all cycle safety issues.
defaultA city where the streets feel safe to walk and run and cycle: the benefits of this go far beyond the direct impact on cyclist safety. It’s achievable if we have the will to do it.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default