&#xa0;
defaultFurther written evidence submitted bydefault defaultProfessor Richard ThompsondefaultFurther to the oral evidence I gave to the Environmental Audit Committee on 8
defaultth
default January two
default issues remained in my mind that were not fully discussed
default (Q131 and Q151)
default.
defaultQ131default 
defaultZac Goldsmithdefault:default What I am struggling with is that this ought to be an issue that is relatively black and white. They either biodegrade or they don’t. It is not a mystery. How can we have such discrepancy of views on this?
defaultThompson additional response: default The problem is that the standard EN 13432 that is being used as a loose definition for biodegradability actually only refers to degradation in industrial conditions such as pre-shredded plastic, at high temperatures (58 ºC) and specific conditions of pH and humidity. Unless we create a specific waste stream for plastic bags it is unlikely that many will end up in a composter. More importantly my understanding about part of the motivation for an exemption was to reduce the impact  / duration of litter in the natural environment. There are tests that could be run in the natural environment, but to date the focus has been on meeting EN 13432 which has little bearing on degradation in the natural environment. A fuller discussion of standards for composting such as EN 13432 can be found in 
default(
defaultSong et al. 2009
default)
default.
defaultSong, J. H., Murphy, R. J., Narayan, R. &amp; Davies, G. B. H. 2009 Biodegradable and compostable alternatives to conventional plastics. 
defaultPhilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B
default 
default364default, 2127-2140.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn relation to degradation I have a selection of bags of various ages collected mainly out of curiosity and stored rather than used. I brought examples with me to show the Committee but there was not time to do so.  
defaultExample 1) I collected from a major UK retailer exactly 10 years ago. On the bag it claimed to be 100% degradable and said that the process would start in 18 months and be complete after 36 months. After ten years at room temperature (office / home conditions) I am left with literally thousands of tiny pieces of plastic  - microplastic. 
defaultThe bag appears to have degraded physically by fragmentation, but biodegradation is not apparent. 
defaultIt is not clear how long these 
defaultfragments
default will persist. It is quite possible that such deterioration might have been faster if the bag had been dropped as litter in the natural environment, but 
defaultfurther tests would be needed 
defaultto
default establish
default this. If a bag is to be exempt from
default the L
defaultevy on the grounds of its degradability then it would need to biodegrade completely into carbon dioxide, methane and water or be incorporated by micro-organisms. This would need to occur without any pre-treatment, would need to occur in a range of natural habitats and would need to be sufficiently rapid so as to have meaningful benefits in terms of a reduction of litter (aesthetic problems and problems to wildlife). It is this evidence about the biodegradation of plastic bags in the natural environment that is lacking. As an aside I would be concerned
default if an 
defaultexemption
default from the Levy effectively promoted increased usage of 
defaultbags that fragment into powder in the home / office environment, as has occurred with my sample.
defaultExample 2) is approximately 25 years old, it is still intact and functional. It is a conventional bag, of similar thickness to the bags currently described as bags for life, and my understanding is that it would be fully compatible with recycling. Were the bag to be kept for long enough I suspect it would eventually deteriorate into fragments
default,
default as is the case for Example 1
default, but this would be physical deterioration rather than biodegradation
default.
defaultSo to resolve the discrepancies in viewpoints regarding biodegradation one has to define the conditions under which the item needs to biodegrade. In this case in order to merit an exemption from the Levy. If such a bag were developed it is important to ensure that new problems, such as incompatibility with recycling or deterioration in service, did not arise as a consequence of meeting any newly specified conditions of biodegradation. 
defaultQ151default 
defaultCaroline Lucasdefault:default On a completely different matter—others have said this as well—plastic bags are important, but not the only environmental problem or the biggest problem. What really interests me is how we use a campaign around plastic bags to stimulate and catalyse greater behaviour change among the public. Is there any evidence that you are aware of what will do that—whether in Italy or anywhere else where this has happened—which has been enough to stimulate a bigger chain reaction of actions? To bring it back to the focus of this particular inquiry, if we have all found it confusing to understand why this is or is not being exempted, do you think there is a risk that, in terms of any public information campaign, it could muddy the waters for that? 
defaultThompson additional response: defaultThis is a key question. I am not aware of published research on how a levy on bags will have a broader effect (see also comments from Matthew Quinn about ‘
defaultpositive social impact
default’ in an earlier evidence session). This kind of broader picture it is something I am currently working on with colleagues at Plymouth University.  Logically one would hope that raising awareness about the plastic carrier bag itself, via a levy, will help to stimulate interest in the contents of the bag
default,
default i.e. the disposable packaging 
defaultused 
defaulton the goods carried home in those bags. At present around 30% of all the plastics produced are disposable items, mainly packaging. These items are designed to get goods safely to the consumer and also for marketing. To date less emphasis seems to have been placed on designing for end-of-life. The discussion on plastic bags has been complex, but actually I think it is more 
defaultclear
default cut than the decisions that will likely need to be made on packaging in the near future. The principles however are the same: 1) do the job effectively with the minimum material possible
default, taking account of potential re-usage
default, 2) use recycled content and 3) design for end-of-life, for example via designing for recyclability. Perha
defaultps some of the income from the L
defaultevy could be directed back toward industrial innovation of packaging design to better achi
defaulteve these objectives. Then as these 
defaultproducts 
defaultevolved,
default perhaps bags for life could be used to carry educational messages that would help inform about ma
defaultterial reduction and recycling?
default In short I believe a considerable number of consumers are keen to do the right thing, but are confused as to what the right thing is. So, 1, 2 and 3 need to be coupled with accurate information to help guide consumer choice. These issues are discussed more fully elsewhere
default,
default but I would point to the following publications:
defaultKoelmans, A. A., Gouin, T., Thompson, R. C., Wallace, N. &amp; Arthur, C. 2014 Plastics in the marine environment. 
defaultEnvironmental Toxicology and Chemistry
default 
default33default, 5-10.
defaultSTAP. 2011 Marine Debris as a Global Environmental Problem: Introducing a solutions based framework focused on plastic. In 
defaultA STAP Information Document. 
default, pp. 40. Washington, DC: Global Environment Facility,.
defaultThompson, R. C., Moore, C., vom Saal, F. S. &amp; Swan, S. H. 2009 Plastics, the environment and human health: current consensus and future trends. 
defaultPhilosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 
default364
default, 2153-2166.
default19 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default