&#xa0;defaultWritten evidence fromdefault Lord Goldsmith QCdefault&#xa0;
defaultINTRODUCTION
defaultGENESIS AND PURPOSE OF THE CHARTER AND THE UK GOVERNMENT APPROACH TO IT
defaultNOT NEW RIGHTS
default“
defaultIn so far as this Charter contains rights which correspond to rights guaranteed by the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, the meaning and scope of those rights shall be the same as those laid down by the said Convention. This provision shall not prevent Union law providing more extensive protection.” 
defaultThe effect of this is that where rights are based on the European Convention Rights they are, notwithstanding distances of language (to the extent that those exist which is in fact minimal), the same. The provisions have to be interpreted in exactly the same way.  This includes necessarily by reference to
default the 
defaultjurisprudence of the European Convention on Human Rights.
defaultTHE DECISION IN AB V SECRETARY OF STATE
default“The j
defaultudge said, however, that the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg has since given a judgment which means that the Charter, which contains a ‘host of new rights’ is now valid in British courts.”
default“
defaultThe constitutional significance of this decision [in reference to an ECJ decision I discuss below] can hardly be overstated.  The Human Rights Act 1998 incorporated into our domestic law large parts, but by no means all, of the European Convention o
defaultn
default Human Rights.  Some parts were deliberately missed out by Parliament.  The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union contains, I believe
default,
default all of those missing parts and a great deal more.  Notwithstanding the endeavours of our political representatives 
defaultat
default Lisbon it would seem that the much wider 
defaultC
defaultharter of 
defaultR
defaultights is now part of our domestic law.  Moreover, that much wider 
defaultC
defaultharter of 
defaultR
defaultights would remain part of our 
defaultdomestic law even if the Human Rights Act were repealed.”
defaultTHE PROTOCOL
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default7
default&#xa0;
defaultError! No property name supplied.default 
default              
defaultAs the papers 
defaultreferred to at Annexes 1, 2 and 3 
defaultare published elsewhere, they are not reproduced here 
defaultand do not
default form part of the 
defaultformal 
defaultwritten evidence to the Committee.
default