&#xa0;
defaultWritten evidence submitted bydefault Symphony Environmental Technologiesdefault&#xa0;
defaultSymphony is a British 
defaultquoted 
defaultcompany, selling British oxo-biodegradable technology and earning foreign currency for the UK around the world.  We are specialists in oxo-biodegradable plastics, and I have myself been working in the British plastics industry for the past 40 years.  
default&#xa0;
defaultI am having difficulty 
defaultwith 
defaultthe evidence given to your Committee by 
defaultsome of the witnesses.  
defaultI agree with 
defaultthe recyclers
default that bio-based “compostable” plastic cannot be recycled with conventional plastic, and that it should not therefore be encouraged for plastic shopping bags (see the Austrian TCKT report of Nov 2013 commissioned by EuPC).  However, this is not the case with oxo-biodegradable plastics, for the reasons given in Roediger laboratories report of 2012, and their supplementary report of 2013, having reviewed
default the
default TCKT report.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn the last two years Symphony have sold enough d
default2
defaultw masterbatch to make 300,000 tons of oxo-biodegradable plastic 
defaultproducts, and 
defaultwe estimate that other suppliers sold at least the same amount, making a total of more than 600,000 tons. We know that oxo-biodegradable plastic products have been successfully recycled for the past 10 years by customers of ours around the world such as Altapro, Bemis, Fujairah, Polybless, Poly-America, Verolene
default&#xa0;
defaultetc. In the UK we know that until recently Tesco’s carrier bags were oxo-biodegradable, and that they were successfully recycled by Jayplas.  In those ten years we have heard no reports of any difficulty encountered.
default&#xa0;
defaultOur experience is entirely consistent with the Roediger report, that oxo-bio can be safely recycled, 
defaultand
default the recyclers have presented the Committee with no technical evidence and no experience to the contrary.  Not one of them 
defaultwas able to say 
defaultthat they had recycled ox
defaulto-biodegradable plastic and 
defaultencountered problems.
default&#xa0;
defaultChase Plastics say that oxo-bio is not the environmental option, but in its 2011 report for the UK Government, and in its 2012 
defaultsupplementary 
defaultreport
default,
default Intertek found that it had better environmental credentials than conventional plastic, bio-based plastic, paper, or cotton. Chase Plastics’ statement that “i
defaultn carbon terms they are significantly more burdensome on the environment than a reprocessed plastic bag” is not therefore correct.
default Intertek also found that plastic carrier bags are not “single-use” bags.
default 
default&#xa0;
defaultThere is no reason why an oxo
default-bio bag should not be made with
default reprocessed material, and the OPA has proposed 
defaultto the Committee 
defaultan oxo-bio bag with 40% recycled content as the IDEAL bag. Chase Plastics say “A reprocessed plastic carrier bag, with its admirable environmental credentials, also can be sturdy and quite fit for repeated uses.
default”
default  This will not be affected by the oxo-bio additive, and the reason 
defaultwhy 
defaultthe Tesco bags failed was because they were not properly made.
default&#xa0;
defaultMr. Baxter of BPI said on 8
defaultth 
defaultJanuary “we have no commercial interest in supermarket carrier bags whatsoever. We do not make them. We do not sell them.”  Chase plastics confirmed on 6
defaultth
default December that they too are not involved in reprocessing carrier bags.”
defaultThe proposed exemption is for carrier bags, so 
defaultI can see
default no basis for saying that their business would be damaged.  
default&#xa0;
defaultWdefaultith regard to defaultdamp-proof membranes, the British Packaging and Industrial Films Association Standard 6/83Adefault-1995default for polyethylene damp defaultproof membranes specifies LDPE as a suitable material and allows “segregated traceable recyclates defaultof such.”    Therefore, manufacturers do not use recyclate made from post-consumer plastic waste such as plastic carrier bags which is not segregated and traceable.  The concerns expressed to the Committee by the recyclers on this issue are not therefore relevant to the Inquiry.default&#xa0;
defaultFurther, damp proof membranes are made from LDPE, but 
defaultSupermarket carrier bags are normally made from HDPE + CaCO3, which is not the same material. These carrier bags would not therefore be recycled into long-life films but into similar short-life products, as to which Roediger says “If
default the new product to be made from recyclate which contains a pro-degradant formulation is intended for short-life uses such as garbage-sacks, bin-liners, shopping bags, bread wrappers etc. the effect of any pro-degradant formulation is unlikely to manifest itself before the end of the intended service-life.  Biodegradability for such items is in any event desirable, because a proportion of them will find their way into the land or sea environments, where they could otherwise subsist for decades after being discarded. “
default&#xa0;
defaultThe reason why oxo-bio additive is included @
default 
default1% is that it will not work if added at a lower rate.  Therefore if the new product was made with 50% 
defaultrecycled oxo-biodegradable plastic
default it would contain only half the amount of additive required to create oxo-biodegradability. 
default&#xa0;
defaultEven if HDPE + CaCO3 did find its way into damp-proof membranes oxo-biodegradation requires oxygen, so it cannot proceed where the dpm is covered with concrete, except if the edges (which are not acting as a dpm) are protruding.  Stabilisers would be necessary only for building films intended to be exposed to the open air
default, and stabilisers such as HALS are routinely included
default.
default The 
defaultstabiliser
default would be added by the manufacturer of the new product, having regard to conditions and 
defaultStandards
default in his country
default for the particular product
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultDEFRA has found no evidence that biodegradable plastic bags of any kind encourage litter
default.
default&#xa0;
defaultBPI claim that the Roediger report shows that at even a 20% inclusion rate tensile performance drops by 16% (MD) and 24% (TD) immediately and after 300 hours of ageing by 25% (MD) and 39% (TD).  We have asked Roediger laboratories about this, 
defaultand their response 
defaulti
defaults that elongation was higher and variations could be caused by the difference in polymer grade used. 
default 
defaultThey confirm that their 
defaultreport 
defaultshows
default that the blend 
defaultcontaining oxo biodegradable ages just as well 
defaultas 
defaultcompounds that do not contain oxo biodegradable
default. 
defaultRoediger 
defaultsee no reason to change their 
default2012 
defaultview
default, confirmed in 2013,
default that 
default“plastic products made with oxo-biodegradable technology may be recycled without any significant detriment to the newly formed recycled product.”  default&#xa0;
defaultThe fifth paragraph of the BPI evidence of 13.1.14 is particularly misleading.  First they say that the UK plastic recycling sector reprocessed 28
default0,000 tonnes of product in 2012,
default  
defaultbut t
defaulthis was all product
defaults
default, not just carrier bags (which is what the proposed exemption is for)
default. 
default&#xa0;
defaultSecond, Roediger confirms that there would be absolutely no need for stabilisers 
defaultfor short-life uses such as garbage-sacks, bin-liners, shopping bags, bread wrappers etc., nor for thick cross-section products such as garden furniture. The only need for stabilisers would therefore be for long-life films intended for exposure to the open environment – a very much smaller quantity than the 
default280,000 tonnes to which Mr. Baxter refers.  
default&#xa0;
defaultThird, he says “a
defaultssuming an addition rate 
default[for stabiliser] 
defaultof 2% - this will increase the cost to UK recyclers of £40 tonne.”  A tonne represents 110,000 carrier bags, so the cost would be 0.0003
default per bag
default, which 
defaultwould be amply covered by
default the 0.05 proposed to be charged.
default  Moreover, the cost is not to UK recyclers at all. 
default&#xa0;
defaultWe would like to address Novamont’s comments (14.1.14) on the international standards applicable to oxo-biodegradable plastic.  Standard BS8472:2011 - “Methods for the assessment of the
default&#xa0;
defaultoxo-biodegradation of plastics and of the
default&#xa0;
defaultphyto-toxicity of the residues in controlled laboratory conditions.”  These are detailed scientific tests to be performed in order to demonstrate degradability, biodegradability, and non-toxicity.  Although conducted in a laboratory, they have been prescribed by the Standards body for the purpose of measuring so far as possible the performance of the product in the open environment – otherwise there would be no point in doing them.  An arbitrary pass-fail test is not prescribed because it is for the end-user or government to decide on the basis of the test report whether the material is or is not suitable for the application in the environmental conditions for which it is intended.
default&#xa0;
defaultThe use of ISO 17556 is not confined to oxo-biodegradable plastics, but it is used to measure the biodegradation of such plastics.  This is the standard used by the 
defaultTechnical Research Institute of Sweden and the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences in their peer-reviewed work published in Vol. 96 of the journal of Polymer Degradation &amp; Stability (2011) at pages 919-928.  It shows 91% biodegradation in a soil environment within 24 months.
default&#xa0;
defaultProfessor Thompson said on 8
defaultth
default January 
defaultthat this
default research required the plastic material to essentially be cooked at high temperature prior to being subjected to biodegradation testing. This shows a fundamental misunderstanding of the process, as might be expected from a professor who is not a polymer scientist.  This is a legitimate way, prescribed by the Standards organisations, to obtain oxidised material for biodegradation testing.   It speeds up the process but does not invalidate the tests – otherwise there would be no point in doing them.  It is necessary to speed up the test for an oxo-biodegradable plastic because it is designed so that it will not start to degrade until the expiry of the useful-life specified by the government or end-user.  In a UK environment the abiot
defaultic degradation of a carrier bag would take from 3
default-12 months, and at the end of that time it would not be visible and would not be toxic and would not be plastic.  It is not 
defaulttherefore 
defaultimportant how long 
defaultthe 
defaultbiodegradation phase lasts – materials which are obviously biodegradable such as leaves or twigs would take much longer to biodegrade.
default Biodegradati
defaulton would be progressive and would
default occur concurre
defaultntly with abiotic degradation as
default molecular weight
default reduces.
default&#xa0;
defaultIn conclusion we agree with the OPA that 5p should be charged on oxo-bio carrier bags containing 40% recycled content, and 10p on other types of bags.  We would have no objection if the lower charge were 
defaultapplied only 
defaultto 
defaultsuch 
defaultbags 
defaultas are 
defaultmade in the UK/EU, as the 5p charge would more than cover the extra cost of manufacturing here, and would help to create 
defaultlocal 
defaultjobs.
default&#xa0;
defaultMICHAEL LAURIER
defaultChief Executive
default&#xa0;
default22 January 2014
default&#xa0;
default