FBA0018/13-14
defaultDeloitte—Written evidencedefaultWe welcome the opportunity to provide evidence to the Finance Bill Sub-Committee’s enquiry into the draft Finance Bill 2014, and set out below our key comments under the various headings. 
defaultTaxation of partnershipsdefault1.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultDeloitte advises a significant 
defaultnumber of professional partnerships and in particular many of the world’s leading law firms. The majority of such firms are now constituted as LLPs, following the introduction of the Limited Liability Partnership Act in 2000, which encouraged this as a bus
defaultiness structure for these and other businesses formerly operating as General Partnerships. 
defaultWe have 
defaultactively engaged with
default the consultation process, having responded to the Consultation Document and had various meetings with the 
defaultHMRC
default team responsible. 
default2.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe main policy objectives of the changes proposed in the Finance Bill 2014 
defaulthave expanded since the initial consultation and now are
default:
defaultWhilst we support these objec
defaulttives, 
defaultin our view 
defaultthe legislation that has been proposed does not meet them
default. Furthermore, o
defaultur main concern is that 
defaultthe disguised remuneration proposals
default go far beyond the stated objective of tacking those seeking to manipulate the tax rules and, instead, a
defaultlter the tax treatment of partnership in the UK.  As such
default v
defaultirtually all professional practices in the UK
default are affected by these proposals.  It is 
defaultdoubtful
default that this was ever the intention or the policy objective
default. 
default&#xa0;
default3.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe di
defaultfference
default in tax treatment b
defaultetween LLPs a
defaultnd general
default partnerships (GPs) arises from
default the specific tax legislation which was introduced when LLPs became available in 2000.  
defaultThat legislation states
default that (providing the LLP is carrying on a trade, profession or vocation with a view to profit) 
default“all the activities of the LLP are treated as carried on in partnership by its members”.  
defaultThis 
defaultis interpreted by HMRC to mean
default that all the members are to be trea
defaultted as self-employed, 
defaultirrespective of the commercial substance of their status and 
defaultwhether or not they would have been so under the 
defaultwell-established rules applying to
default partners in GPs. 
default3.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIn our view
default the need for the
defaultse
default proposals in Finance Bill 2014 are as a 
defaultresult of the
default 
defaultill-considered legislation introduced in 2000.  If the rules relating to GPs had been directly applied to LLPs 
defaultat this time, 
defaultthe playing field 
defaultbetween the two types of business structure 
defaultwould always have been level
default and the door would never h
defaultave been opened to those who might be tempted to use the rule solely to reduce tax
default. 
default3.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIf the policy objective is to level the playing field between UK LLPs and other partnerships (such as GPs and US LLPs) then the simplest solution would be to amend the ori
defaultginal deficient legislation to remove the presumption that members are to be taxed as partners.  This would allow the law to revert back to the previous position namely that an individual’s status as partner or employee should be assessed by reference to t
defaulthe 
defaultcase law 
defaulttests. 
default3.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultHowever, it seems that HMRC, rather tha
defaultn 
defaultapply
default similar rules across both LLPs and GPs
default,
default is now introducing complex rules to counter perceived avoidance in this area
default.
default 
defaultAt the heart of the problem is a failure to appreciate that the difference between a partner and an employee cannot be defined 
defaultby a
default formula.  Rather, it is a question of the qualitative balance of factors
default,
default which is why the UK case law which has evolved ove
defaultr the centuries constructs the test in this manner.  
defaultThe challenge with a formula is that it is likely to mean many partnerships not engaged in avoidance need to alter some of their terms of partnership and additionally that those intent on manipulation wi
defaultll simply have bright lines to satisfy.  Further, the approach chosen is different to the qualitative factors which apply to partners in GPs and overseas LLPs, thus continuing the perceived distortions.
default3.5.
default&#xa0; 
defaultU
defaultnder the new proposals, a member will be treated as 
defaultemployed if all of the following characteristics are met:
default3.8
default              
defaultMany professional partnerships will find that their members fall within these rules despite the fact that there
default was no tax avoidance motive in their appointment as members. 
default3.9
default              
defaultThe new proposals will mean that, irrespective of the motive in making individuals LLP members rather than employees, all LLPs will need to consider their internal structure and assess 
defaultwhether the new proposals will apply to them.
default  For many it means, in practice, adjusting either their partner remuneration and appraisal systems or their capital structures before 6 April 2014 so as to fit within these new defined parameters.  
defaultWe believe t
defaulthat many partnerships may wish to increase capital to meet the 25% parameter mentioned above.  
default3.11
default              
defaultPerhaps
default the Sub-Committee will be seeking the vi
defaultews of the banks on this change – as most partnerships arrange borrowings for partners to finance capital c
defaultontributions to partnerships.  Although it is common for borrowing to be arranged centrally, the debt remains 
defaultpersonal
default debt of the individual partners and not a partnership liability.
default  Our understanding from informal discussions is that, while 
defaultbanks
default will a
defaultim to be as helpful as possible to businesses, the shift required from lending to the firm towards lending to individual partners (so as to increase their capital exposure within
default 
defaulttheir firms) is not necessarily welcome given the higher amounts of regulatory capital required to support lending to individuals than lending to business.  We anticipate that many partners of smaller firms will struggle to 
defaultraise
default the required lending withi
defaultn this timetable. 
default4.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe consultation was first announced in Budget 2013 with the new rules proposed to take effect from 6 April 2014.  This was an ambitious time scale
default.
default 
defaultThe consultation team were very active in
default meeting 
defaultboth 
defaultindustry specialists and 
defaultthose potentially affected.  
defaultHowever, the process may have been easier if industry specialists had been more closely involved from the start, or even included in the team. Numerous specialists are available within HMR
defaultC who could have assisted in this regard.
default4.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultThe consultation process which took place in the summer sought responses on the basis of a much less far-reaching set of proposals than those ultimately then published on 10 December.  Had businesses known the true
default parameters many more would have responded and those that did respond would have responded differently.
default4.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWe query whether a full impact assessment has been undertaken given the late change from proposals designed to address tax-avoidance to proposals with m
defaultore fundamental impact across the professions.  Careful impact assessment is important because the cash flow impact of these changes on small to medium-sized professional practices could ca
defaultus
defaulte the 
defaultfinancial difficulties for
default some businesses coming as it doe
defaults at a time of hardship for many, and without adequate time to arrange alternative sources of funding. 
default5.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultT
defaulthe proposals released on 10 December 2013 
defaultto apply from 6 April 2014 
defaultwere radically different from the original proposals
default. This l
defaulteaves 
defaulta very short time for 
defaultthe many LLPs who are affected by the new proposals 
default(
defaultdespite operating entirely legitimately
default)
default, to re-
defaultorganise their affairs within 
defaultpermissible
default parameters, as outlined 
defaultin 3.
default5
default 
defaultabove.
default Such a re-organisation is a time-intensive leadership chore with a very tight timeframe given the necessary partner consultation periods and discussions with firm’s bankers
default.
default 
defaultSome partnerships will need to amend their partnership documents, which certainly
default requires consultation within the partnership and is not a simple or quick process. 
default5.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultTh
defaulte task
default is particularly difficult as there are still a number of uncertainties around the new rules, 
defaultand their intended application 
defaultto
default many common partnership scenarios i
defaults not yet clear, 
defaultdespite the 
defaultguidance issued in December. 
defaultFurther guidance is expected to be published in February which may assist in dealing with these uncertainties.
default5.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIt may have been more appropriate for the changes to have been deferred to allow for a 
defaultmore detailed consultation on the ope
defaultration of th
defaulte
defaults
defaulte
default new rules, which were effectively first announced on 10 December 2013.
default5.4.
default&#xa0; 
defaultFurthermore an implementation date of 6 April brings many additional complexities to the process.  It would be far more sensible to 
defaultimplement the changes at the start of the partnership accounting period, which for many professional partnerships is 1 May
default or 1 June
default, rather than to have the complication of treating members as both partners and employees in the same accounting period.  Th
defaultis was drawn to HM
defaultRC’s
default attention during the consultation process and it is unfortunate that it was not taken into account in designing the proposals as it does not seem likely that any significant loss of revenue would be involved by aligning the changes t
defaulto accounting periods rather than tax years. 
default6.1.
default&#xa0; 
defaultAs mentioned above, we fully accept the po
defaultlicy objective of
default prevent
defaulting
default unfairness and market distortion by ensuring that inappropriate partnership a
defaultllocations to a company or similar vehicle cannot create tax advantages.
default However, as in the disguised remuneration provisions above, the proposals are very wide, and are likely to affect many 
defaultcommon
default structures, as well as 
defaultthe tax-motivated structures for which 
defaultthey were designed.  
default6.2.
default&#xa0; 
defaultIn particular, they run counter to a number of other current legislative and regulatory initiatives, including the liberalisation of the practice of law through Alternative Business Structures.  
default 
defaultThese structures facilitate non-lawyer external investment into the legal profession.  The most common structure is for the law firm to continue as a partnership but for external ownership to be admitted via a company which becomes a controlling member of
default the law firm.  This creates a 
default“
defaultmixed partnership
default”
default which, at first blush is caught by these 
defaultpunitive new rules.   This is particularly unfortunate as the law is one of the UK
default’
defaults most successful international exports and the liberalisation of the profession 
defaultwas a positive opportunity for the UK to again take the lead, internationally, in the evolution of legal services.  This tax change takes away with one hand the important commercial opportunity offered by Government with the other hand.
default6.3.
default&#xa0; 
defaultWhether or not a bu
defaultsiness is caught by the rules is not determined by a test of commercial motivation; instead it is to be assessed by a test of whether or not it is 
default“
defaultreasonable to suppose
default”
default that the company
default’
defaults share of profits from the partnership is attributable to the indiv
defaultidual partner
default’
defaults 
default“
defaultpower to enjoy
default”
default it.  We can see how this test works to capture inappropriate tax-motivated structures but our concern is that it leaves some genuine, commercial structures and practices in a position of great uncertainty given the highly s
defaultubjective nature of the test and the lack of any useful guidance as to how it is to be interpreted and applied by HMRC in practice.  There would have been ways of tackling the policy objective without such unfortunate adverse side effects on business.
default&#xa0;
defaultTaxdefault Policy MakingdefaultWe very much welcomed the coalition Government’s June 2010 document on Tax Policy Making.  The key improvements we saw are the extended time
defaultframe
default for introducing new
default legislation, with consultation
default at multiple stages; the focus on re-consider
defaulting the legal 
defaultframework
default for some areas rather than trying to ‘
defaultpatch
default’ holes in the 
defaultlegalisation
default; and the increased evidence about the policy change and those potentially affected.   
defaultThere have been some clear successes from the new approach.  The basic not
defaultion of announcing an outline area in a Budget, producing a consultation document in, say, June and engaging in discussion before preparing draft legislation for consultation from early December and enactment by the following July should give the time neede
defaultd for proper consideration of the measures proposed.   Examples of successes include the new controlled foreign company rules (started by the previous government) and the statutory residence test.  We also commend the withdrawal of proposal
defaults
default when consultat
defaultion reveals that they 
defaultare unlikely to
default achieve the intended effect.  
defaultExamples of areas where the Policy Making framework has not been applied fully include the SDLT and Annual tax on Enveloped Dwellings changes implemented in 2012 and 2013 and the partners
defaulthips consultation discussed above.  In these cases, the objectives of the policy were not set out fully at the start and undoubtedly changed 
defaultsignificantly 
defaultduring the course of the policy development.  That doesn’t help effective development
default of a policy and its translation into legislation.
default  
defaultThe cap on income tax reliefs is another example of poor policy making, which the committee considered last year.  We still cannot understand the economic rationale 
defaultfor limiting some loss reliefs in resp
defaultect of losses arising from the business in which the taxpayer is mainly engaged, but not limiting (or having a much higher limit) for some investment losses.  We do fully accept the possible need to put a cap on certain reliefs for cost reasons, though.  
defaultWe would also highlight policy changes in relation to the oil and gas sector as examples where quite significant economic changes have been announced with insufficient consideration of the overall impact.  The announcement of the increased rate of suppleme
defaultntary corporation tax has previously been highlighted; the Autumn Statement 2103 contained another change in relation to drilling rigs without enough discussion with the industry on the case for change and the best means of achieving that change.  Naturall
defaulty the responsibility for policy choices will always rest with the elected government of the day but we should all want those choices to be made with as much information as possible.  
defaultThe final area to encourage is post-implementation review.  We have not 
defaultyet seen a good example of this being carried out.
defaultJanuary 2014
default