&#xa0;
defaultWRITTEN EVIDENCE SUBMITTED BY THE defaultANIMAL MANAGER OF THE ROYAL ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY OF SCOTLANdefaultDdefault’S HIGHLAND WILDLIFE PARK defaultTO THE ENVIRONMENT, FOOD AND RURAL AFFAIRS SELECT COMMITTEEdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;defaultINQUIRY INTO THE KEEPING OF PRIMATES AS PETSdefault&#xa0;default&#xa0;
defaultRather than provide a repetition of some of the excellent submissions you have already received, I would concur with much, if not all, of the reasoning supporting a ban on keeping primates as pets provided by the Primate Society of Great Britain and Monkey
default World.
defaultHaving worked with a very wide range of primates in zoos around the world over the last 38 years, I can comment on this issue from an informed point of view.  As detailed already by others, their social complexity, nutritional and environmental nee
defaultds and the tangible disease risks they can present, makes them an unsuitable group of animals to be kept by the vast majority of people.  Professional zoological establishments and the few well informed private individuals, who often work in tandem with th
defaulte reputable zoo community
default, are the only groups that have the required skills and resources to manage these animals in an appropriate and humane manner.
defaultThe establishment of the Dangerous Wild Animal Act (DWA) did much to control the keeping of primates wit
defaulthin the UK, with the exception of the Callitrichids (marmosets and, more recently, tamarins), and I would suggest that from a disease perspective specifically, it would be prudent to include all primates under this existing piece of legislation.  Of course
default the DWA is a piece of health and safety legislation and often does little to promote good animal welfare.
defaultMost wild animals make very poor pets and due to their biological and behavioural needs they are generally prone to being kept under less than ideal 
defaultor even adequate conditions by the general public.  Primates probably present the most complex order of animals that are a focus of the pet trade, and so it would be prudent and a significant advancement in national animal welfare legislation if a broad ba
defaultn was put in place.
defaultSo as not to punish the handful of serious private holders, it would be advisable for the suitably experienced, locally licensed, zoo or wildlife park to act as advisors for their local council or licensing authority on the appropriaten
defaultess or not of any individual holder and whether they should be granted an exemption.
default  That said, an expansion of the species covered within the DWA to include all primates and to also consider animal welfare would also cover most situations.
default&#xa0;
default26
defaultTH
default January 2014
default&#xa0;
default