&#xa0;
defaultSubmission from the US Embassy, LondondefaultThe U.S.-UK Relationshipdefault (USA 20)defaultOur Story
defaultRelations between the United States and the United Kingdom are unlike those between any other two countries.  
defaultThe Times of London wrote in 1913, “
defaultGreat Britain and the United States
default stand to one another in a special relationship, and between them some departure from the merely official attitude is most natural.”
default  The relationship is still 
defaultspecial and it is still 
defaultnatural
default.  In a 20
default12
default poll, 
defaultninety 
defaultpercent of the American public 
defaultviewed 
defaultthe United Kingdom 
defaultfavorably and the trend was rising
default. 
default 
defaultPr
defaultesident Obama 
defaultreflected the American view when he said
default, “…our people – and the people around the world – are more secure and more prosperous when the United States and the United Kingdom stand toget
defaulther.”
defaultThe history of the U.S.-UK relationship is not one of unrelieved harmony starting, as it did, with the American Revolutionary War and carrying on into the War of 1812.  
defaultDuring the 
defaulttwenty-year period from 1895 to 1915
default, historians note that 
defaultU.S. and Br
defaultitish foreign policies moved into general
default, cooperative
default alignment; they call it the “Great Rapprochement.”  
defaultW
defaulthen the U.S. in 1917 overcame its reluctance to ent
defaulter World War I, 
defaultit 
defaultclearly 
defaultwould do so on the side of the Anglo-French Entente.  
defaultPresident Woodrow Wilson said the U.S. 
defaultentered the war
default “to make the world safe for democracy.” 
default 
defaultPresident Franklin Roosevelt 
defaultechoed that theme 
defaultwhen he announced in 1940 the 
defaultU.S. 
defaultintention to serve as the “Arsenal of Democracy
default” even before entering World Wa
defaultr II
default,
default and in the 1941 Atlantic Charter, in which Roosevelt and 
defaultWinston 
defaultChurchill pledged to advance democracy around the world after the defeat of Nazi Germany. 
default 
defaultThe wartime alliance
default -- 
defaultbased 
defaulto
defaultn joint planning and shared intelligence -- 
defaultproved resilient as
default the U
defaultnited States
default and UK partnered 
defaultwith 
defaultother 
defaultallies 
defaultto win the Cold War and then to deal with post-Cold War terrorism threats.
default  
defaultAll along, however, there have been areas of disagreement, as one would expect between two countries 
defaultwith
default global interests.  In the longer sweep of history,
default however,
default what appeared to be fundamental U.S.-UK disagreements now look like
default dated
default disagreements.
default  Most Americans probably are more understanding of the UK’s refusal to commit troops to Vietnam than the A
defaultmerican public was at the time.  The Skybolt affair
default, which involved
default nuclear weapons 
defaultsystems
default,
default bedeviled the otherwise excellent relationship between John Kennedy and Harold Macmillan
default.  F
defaultar from marking “the end of the special relationship
default,
default” as was 
defaultthen 
defaultfear
defaulted
default,
default 
defaulttoday 
defaultit is 
defaultbarely remembered.  Issues have come and gone, the 
defaultstrong 
defaultrelationship has endured.
defaultClose by Values, Close by Choice
defaultThe U.S.-UK relationship withst
defaultood
default shocks because 
defaultit is based
default largely
default on common values (which usually
default,
default but not always
default,
default lead to shared interests)
default.  It’s also
default based on the American and British publics’ preference for each other’s products, 
defaultmanagement styles, 
defaultculture, entertainment, and sense of humor.
default  
defaultMonty Python and Benedict Cumberbatch’s Sherlock Holmes are hugely popul
defaultar in the United States
default, as is “Downton Abbey”
default (but Marmite has yet to gain a foothold in 
defaultAmerica
default)
default;  
default”Homeland” 
default is the top-rated show
default 
defaultwith British audiences
default.  
defaultWe are the largest investors in each other’s economies and high
default, mutual
default levels of tourism and 
defaultforeign 
defaultstudy reflect personal 
defaultchoices
default by Americans and Britons to remain close
default.
default  It is not simply a matter of a shared language.  Many countries share languages but lack the instinctive affinity that exists between the United States and the United Kingdom
default.  Americans 
defaultknow more place names from Lon
defaultdon (Westminster, Baker Street,
default Trafalgar Square, Hyde Park, 
defaultCharing Cross
default) than they do from 
defaultsome
default 
defaultAmerican cities.  Britons have an enduring fascination with the American West
default, jazz, and Hollywood personalities
default,
default and British tabloids have a 
defaultstrong predilection for 
defaultcarrying 
defaultAmerican human interest stories
default.  If evidence is needed that this shared 
defaultattraction
default is 
defaultpersisting
default, consider that 
defaulta large part
default of America’s youth have grown up 
defaultimagining themselves 
defaultin Middle Eart
defaulth, Narnia, 
defaultor at Hogwarts.
default  
defaultMeanwhile, Elvis Presley, Madonna, and Michael Jackson are among the ten top-selling artists ever in the UK.
default  
defaultPart of the enduring strength of U.S.-UK relations 
defaultalso 
defaultcomes from 
defaultsocietal similarities and 
defaultshared challenges.  
defaultEconomic success, political stability, and rootedness in freedom and liberty have made both the United States and the United Kingdom attractive countries for immigrants.  In 1960, the foreign
default-
defaultborn population of both the U
defaultnited States
default and the UK was around 
default5 percent.  Today, the number for both countries
default is around 12 percent.  
defaultThe U.S. and UK are joint leaders in higher education.  Most international 
defaultcomparisons
default show that American and British universities dominate the ranks of the world’s 
defaulttop
default twenty universi
defaultties.  In science and research, American and British scientists win a disproportionate number of Nobel prizes.  
defaultT
defaulthe text of the U.S. Supreme Court’s 
default2008 
defaultBoumediene decision
default, 
defaultregarding a Guantanamo detainee
default, is a 
defaulttelling indicator of 
defaultthe 
defaultdepth 
defaultof 
defaultU.S.-UK h
defaultistory, shared culture, and common social challenges
default.  The U.S. Supreme Court 
defaultmade
default 
defaulttwo dozen
default references to English law
default as precedent-setting in the course of its reasoning.  Relying on the decisions of foreign courts is distinctly outside of American
default legal
default tradition.  
defaultFor the U.S. Supreme Court to cite English law, and for it to 
defaultdo so
default without 
defaultarousing 
defaultcomment, says much about the U.S.-UK relationship.
default  
default&#xa0;
defaultSharing the World’s Stage
defaultU.S. and UK influence on o
defaultne another is profound, but 
defaultthe special relationship 
defaulthas 
defaultalso 
defaulthad a great impact 
defaulton the world stage
default.
default  
defaultAt the most fundamental level, the U
defaultnited States
default and the UK share a “maritime outlook” that prevai
defaultls over isolationist tendencies.  We believe 
defaulttrade with the world is basic to our pr
defaultosperity, our national security is tied to events beyond our shores, and the well-being of our countries 
defaultdepends on
default influenc
defaulting
default developments in other countries.  The United Kingdom’s military capabilities, development assistance budget, and unparalleled “s
defaultoft power” make it a uniquely capable ally for the United States.  
defaultAs two of 
defaultthe 
defaultfive permanent members of the UN Security Council, the U
defaultnited States
default and UK speak with rare international authority.  Their shared memberships in NATO, the OECD, the OSCE, an
defaultd other organizations provide additional
default venues
default in which
default to cooperate to
default their
default international 
defaultadvantage
default.
default  Beyond that, the UK is a member of the world’s most important organization to which the United States does not belong, the European Union.  
defaultThe United States has 
defaultits own 
defaultclose ties to the EU and does not need the UK to serve as a “bridge” to the organization
default.  B
defaultut common U.S.-UK attitudes towards world trade, development policy, the value of international sanctions, and other issues, often fin
defaultd an expression within the EU through UK membership, to the benefit of both the U
defaultnited 
defaultS
defaulttates
default and the EU.
default  
defaultThe United States and the United Kingdom have shared values, a history of global involvement, and a common vision of the world we seek – one of resp
defaultect f
defaultor the rule of law, 
defaulteconomic development, environme
defaultntal protection, a liberal trading
default system,
default democracy,
default peace, and one which values a plurality of cultures and religions.  
defaultTogether, we 
defaultact
default internationally
default to promote
default “fundamental human rights, the dig
defaultnity and worth of people, the equal rights of men and women, and better standards of life in larger freedom.”  Those are not just American 
defaultand
default British goals
default:
default the words are taken from the Preamble of the Charter of the United Nations.  The kind of world we 
defaultwant to live in is much more likely to 
defaultbe 
defaultachieve
defaultd
default 
defaultwhen 
defaultthe U
defaultnited 
defaultS
defaulttates
default and the U
defaultnited 
defaultK
defaultingdom
default work together
default.
defaultJanuary 2014
default 
default&#xa0;
default