&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
defaultFurther to the Terms Of Reference I submit responses on 
defaultsomedefault of the questions posed by the committee re IPCC AR5 as follows and am very willing to speak on them. I apologize I was unable to submit earlier due to pressure of work and attending to extreme weather affecting the UK but crave the indulgence of the Commi
defaultttee to consider these points – which are largely different from others you may receive. Thank you.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default1. 
defaultTo what extent does AR5 reflect the range of views among climate scientists?
default1.1 The IPCC and AR5 give a very one-sided view but it must be understood 
defaultthat 
default‘views’
default as such and the 
defaultrange of views
default is of little import; what matters is 
defaultOBSERVATIONAL EVIDENCE in the real world and real atmospheredefault for or against all and any theory on offer.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default2. C
defaultan any of the areas of the science now be considered settled as 
defaulta result of AR5’s publication, if so which? What areas need further effort to reduce the levels of uncertainty?
default2.1 The failure of 
defaultALLdefault 
defaultthe
default alarmist predictions of the IPCC since 2000 and their admitted inability to explain the 
defaultvery important changes 
defaultin wor
defaultld circulation (and related world cooling under honest data**) since 2007 mean 
defaultit is now objectively settled by defaultobservationaldefault evidence that the CO2/default ‘defaultGreenhousedefault’default /Man-made Global Warming/ Climate defaultChangedefault proposition has failed defaultignominiouslydefault and must be discarded.default See slides 38 to 41 of 
defaulthttp://www.weatheraction.com/docs/WANews13No43.pdf
default (Piers 
defaultCorbyn
default’
defaults
default Presentation to The Grain &amp; Feed Trades Association International conferenc
defaulte Geneva May 2013).
default2.2 ** See slide 42 in above 
defaultpresentation
default: Recent world temperatures have been artificially upped by about 0.5 
defaultdegC
default by data 
default‘
defaultselection
default’
default (fraud in normal terms) meaning recent ‘warming’ is non-existent compared to warming in the 40’s 
default2.
default3 The main area of further study needed to predict extreme and dangerous weather events (the founding purpose of IPCC rather than 
defaultmilli
default-degree temperature 
defaultchanges
default which have no 
defaultdiscernable
default impact on real weather and climate systems) is solar-magnetic parti
defaultcle weather effects.
default&#xa0;default&#xa0;default3. 
defaultDoes the AR5 address the reliability of climate models?
default 
defaultAnd
default 
defaultHas AR5 sufficiently explained the reasons behind the widely reported hiatus in the global surface temperature record?
default3.1. 
defaultNOdefault. It is a fact (point above) that ALL the CO
default2 driven climate models have failed. The AR5 waffles on this and crucially cannot explain the wild Jet Stream behavior and general drift 
defaultequator
default-wards of 
defaultthe
default Jet stream which has been increasing since 2007.  The Jet Stream, and this is 
defaultessentially
default uncontested, is the main arbiter of extreme weather events and scenarios and of Climate 
defaultChange
default. All previous different climate regimes (
defaulteg
default Mini-Ice-Ages / Little Ice Ages) are described and explained by different Jet Stream regimes. 
default3.2 In their report adefaultt defaultthedefault Royal Society in October 2013 the IPCC reporters stated their extra CO2 models produce none of defaultthedefault wild jet stream defaultchangesdefault which characterize recent yearsdefault.
default  I pointed out that the Jet Stream changes observed and successfully predicted by 
defaultWeatherActio
defaultn
default and many extreme weather events similarly successfully predicted are entirely 
defaultconsistent
default with 
defaultand consequent ondefault our 
defaultWeatherAction
default Solar-Lunar-Action Technique (SLAT) of Long-Range 
defaultforecasting
default and Climate prediction which I developed from a solar-magnetic
default particle understanding with Lunar modulation. See Slides 14-16 of GAFTA.
default3.3 All the predicted (by SLAT) Solar activity, Climate and Jet Stream shifts over recent years have taken place or are taking place (Slide 52 in GAFTA). None of these weather or cli
defaultmate developments were expected by CO2 ‘theory’ which generally expected opposite developments to that which occurred.
default3.4 These proven skilled forecasts have nothing whatsoever to do with the CO2 theory which has zero skill, can explain nothing, predict n
defaultothing, is delusional and has no value.
default3.5 The 60 year, 22yr, 28month, 155day and many other cycles of weather phenomena are explained by and used in the SLAT - Sides 10, 22, 23 in GAFTA – whereas the CO2 theory can explain none of them..
default3.6 The 
defaultWeatherA
defaultction
default Solar-Lunar Action Technique predictions (for Earth facing solar extreme events and weather events 
defaultUK+Eire
default, Europe and USA and certain other weather events such as Hurricane and Cyclone formation and extreme events in Australia / New Zealand) surpass
defaultes or can improve on standard meteorology for extreme weather events on all time scales from 12 months to 1 day ahead as is shown by 
defaultegdefault storm predictions for UK, Eire and Europe since October 2013. 
defaultSee defaulthttp://www.weatheraction.com/docs/WANews14No03.pdfdefault (including defaultWeatherActiondefault offer to help the UK defaultGovtdefault better prepare for Extreme weather situations).default&#xa0;
default4. 
defaultDo the AR5 Physical Science Basis report’s conclusions strengthen or weaken the economic 
defaultcase for action to prevent dangerous climate change?
default4.1 The AR5 conclusions, such as they are, are rambling and delusional and I invite Select Committee members to choose whatever ‘conclusion’ they find most compelling and ask if there is any evidence for
default it and what it actually means in practical terms.
default4.2 The Report essentially assumes CO2 rises and then attempts to conclude what 
defaultfaileddefault 
defaultmodelsdefault might imply temperatures will turn to, despite the real world doing the opposite.
default4.3 The IPCC hasn’t a clue on
default the role of solar activity - confusing light etc radiation with crucial charged particle and magnetic effects.
default4.4 Probably the most absurd aspect of the IPCC ‘Theory’ is revealed as follows:- default(
defaulti
default) IF the (delusional) CO2 warming theory is accepted (hypot
defaulthetically for a moment) it should be noted that
default(ii) The CO2 flux in and out of the biosphere (
defaultsea+land
default) due to man’s total activity is LESS THAN 4% of the total flux.
default(iii) Therefore for Man’s activity to be the key climate driver ALL the other fluxes mus
defaultt be constant (or have total variation a lot less than 4%).
default(iv) This is an insane assumption and requires for example that the CO2 (‘equivalent’) product of termites which is TEN TIMES that of Man stays pretty rigidly constant, as must tree decay, absorpt
defaultion /emission of CO2 over sea, cow emissions and so on. Alternatively all these fluxes must knowingly conspire to add up to a constant (within 
defaultles
default than 4%) to enable Man’s activity to rule. There is no evidence of such a natural conspiracy. It is logically
default strained poppycock.
default4.5 Why the CO2 theory does not work is a minor matter compared with the observed fact that it fails and hardly worthy of consideration anymore than why the flat-Earth theory or the Phlogiston theory of chemistry failed; nevertheless t
defaulthere are some points on this in the GAFTA Geneva Presentation slides 55 -59.
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default5. 
defaultIs the IPCC process an effective mechanism for assessing scientific knowledge? Or has it 
defaultfocused
default on providing a justification for political commitment?
default5.1 It is a political 
defaultprocess with political intent and science (
defaultie
default evidence-based science, and there is no other 
defaultscience
default) has no role in the IPCC other than as a quasi-religious justification for opinions and a raft of economy-ruining measures in favor of interest groups, Big 
defaultOil and Energy companies on the ‘Carbon ticket’. On this see Alex Jones video interview with Piers 
defaultCorbyn
default: 
defaulthttp://
defaultyoutu.be/NoI5w
defaultM
defaultNWOjs
default&#xa0;
default 
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default6. 
defaultIs the rate at which the UK 
defaultGovernment intends to cut CO2 emissions appropriate in light of the findings of the IPCC AR5 Physical Science Basis report?
default6.1 The UK Government should not be cutting CO2 emissions but rather doing its best to increase them in order to enhance plant growt
defaulth and improve the productivity of world agriculture.  
default6.2 It should be noted that 
defaultthe
default basis of life on Earth is CO2 circulation – the key to plant growth and if CO2 levels drop below a certain value plant growth and all life ceases. 
default6.3 In Geological ter
defaultms CO2 levels are very low (having been ten times higher in periods before at times when world temperatures were sometimes the same as or colder than now) and will in all probability get lower after the next full ice age as more CO2 becomes locked in ice, 
defaultcold seas, limestone etc. See GAFTA presentation slide 60.
default&#xa0;
defaultJanuary 2014
default&#xa0;
default&#xa0;
default